Welcome to the Surgery Bots podcast, the show where we explore the latest advancements in
surgical robotics and how they're transforming healthcare. Every two weeks we sit down with a
guest who is at the forefront of this incredible space. Surgical robotics is changing the way we
approach surgery. Our guests are going to share their experiences and insights discussing the
challenges they've faced and successes they've achieved. We'll also delve into the latest trends
and innovations, exploring the newest robotic technologies and how they're being used to
improve patient outcomes. Whether you're a healthcare professional, a researcher or just
interested in the latest advancements in surgical robotics, this podcast is for you. So join us as
we explore the world of surgical robotics and discover how these cutting-edge technologies
are shaping the future of medicine. Hello and welcome to this week's episode of the Surgery
Bots podcast. Today we sit down with David Fischel who's the CEO of Stereotaxis. In this episode,
David gave us a great look at the current state of play in endovascular robotics, why there hasn't
been massive adoption like other areas of surgical robots and why Stereotaxis is poised to grow in
the market. So without further ado, I hope you enjoy this episode. So hello and welcome to this
episode of the Surgery Bots podcast. Today we're joined by David. So hello and welcome to you,
David. Hi, Henry. Thanks for having me. That's absolutely fine. So yeah, first of all,
give me some context. Can you give me a snapshot resume of yours? Sure. So I'm the CEO of Stereotaxis.
We're a publicly traded company. We make a robot that's used for minimally invasive
heart surgery. I came to the company actually from the finance world. So I originally studied math
at UCLA in Los Angeles, then did a BA in Israel, worked in a medical device venture capital firm
there, and then moved to Los Angeles where I worked at Doftler Capital Management. It's a
healthcare-oriented hedge fund, and I focused on medical device investments. And the beauty of
working in the investment universe is that you're forced to look at and assess and try to
determine the future of many different medical device companies across the spectrum of diseases.
And over time, you get a feeling for what is more interesting, what is more likely to be impactful,
what's less interesting, what's less likely to be impactful. And through all of that came
across Stereotaxis. It was a company that was struggling, but looked particularly interesting,
and so decided to shift a little bit from purely that investment role to also where it would
operate in that. Okay, so how did you join Stereotaxis? So were you working on it as an
investment? Were you a firm investor in it, or did you come across it in the outside world?
So I came across it as part of the investment efforts of generally our mandate as an
investor. You're trying to look for interesting technologies, impactful medicines that can be
very beneficial for the world, and that can become much more significant than what they
currently are. So that's generally been the mandate, and found many and was interested in
many of those over the years. And came across Stereotaxis in 2016. The company was not doing
particularly well, and it was in need of external funding. And so as we did the analysis, we were
intrigued by this kind of dichotomy. In investing generally, you want to find situations where the
reality and the potential reality, there's a mismatch, or the perception and the actual
reality is mismatched, and we're using to bridge that gap. And in Stereotaxis case,
the company was on the one hand, nearing bankruptcy. It had very little cash, had
significant debt, had been declining for several years. But on the other hand, it had these kind of
almost kind of what I call the three kind of most basic and most attractive structural elements
of any medical company. It had a very unique differentiated technology, and really kind of,
it's a, I think that when we actually get into more popular technology, we're still
kind of understand more, but really kind of this platform for endovascular robotics that I think
is particularly elegant, and it was actually working in the real world. So we have about 100
hospitals that have treated almost 100,000 patients to date, and the clinical data was as good as it
gets. So when you have that dichotomy of on the one hand, a company that is clearly not doing well,
but on the other hand, it has a very unique technology that works well in the real world,
and that has very good clinical data, that's an interesting dichotomy. It drove us to do a
little bit of like a Harvard Business Review case study on it to try to determine why that mismatch
is taking place. And then with that, we decided that we would be interested in investing in the
company and paying off its debt, giving it operating capital, and also taking more active
roles on the board and in management. Okay, fantastic. So you touched on the
technology there. Tell me, what do stereo taxes produce? And give me a bit of an insight into
the areas that it serves. Sure. So if you think about, if you think about surgery broadly,
and robotics within surgery, there's many, many times people, many times kind of people can be
confused or can kind of lock things together. So the way I like to oftentimes think about it,
I think about surgery in three main categories, kind of open surgery, which is, you know,
typically what you think about when you do surgery and open incision, graspers that hold
on to the tissue, physicians holding tools over the patient, and doing the surgery in that way,
you have laparoscopic surgery, which is laparoscopes, three, four, five, and functional
sticks, one of which has a camera on the end, and some extended physicians operating through those
few smaller incisions in the body. And then you have endovascular surgery. Endovascular obviously
means within the vascular system, you're using the blood vessels as a type of superhighway. So
you gain access in the leg or in the arm. And then you use the blood vessels of this type of
superhighway to reach where you need in the human body. And at the tip of a catheter that is
navigated through the blood vessels, you can have all sorts of functional capabilities, you can
deploy a valve, or you can ablate heart tissue, or you can aspirate a clot, or you can kind of birth
through a clot. And there's many kinds of different things, or you can epilyze a tumor.
So again, there's many types of endovascular surgeries that have emerged over the years.
Overall, if you look at it, both open orthopedic surgery and laparoscopic surgeries are in the
midst of being completely transformed by robotics. That obviously was prompted by intuitive surgical
laparoscopic surgery about two decades ago, and then about a decade later, and MAKO and Mazor
kind of really kind of pioneered things in the orthopedic realm.
Endovascular surgery has almost been immune to any robotics. There's been various attempts over
the years, but really kind of those have been largely unsuccessful. And Stereotaxis, though,
we're a relatively small company, we are kind of the leader, the pioneer in robotics in the
endovascular field. The way we look at flexible robotics in the small, delicate tissues of the
vascular system is we actually have a very kind of unique mechanism of action. And so we take a
catheter, which typically, if you think about the challenge, again, is that as a physician standing
over the patient, you hold on to the handle of the catheter, procedures happening a meter away
at the tip of the catheter. And the way to translate forces with manual catheters is that
you have relatively rigid plastic along the shaft, and you have a pull wire that runs from the tip
till that, like a puppet wire. And so when you push, or pull, or clock, that gets translated
through the plastic. And when you pull a little lever here, you can deflect the tip. The mechanism
overall works, but there's obviously limitations and weaknesses to trying to move the tip of the
catheter from a meter away when you have a flexible device. And so there's imprecisions.
I might clock my hand 90 degrees, but the tip might clock 50 degrees or 150 degrees. There's
translation error over that distance. It doesn't matter how steady my hand is, the tip won't be
steady of a beating heart. I can only do one deflection of the tip. The rigidity that's
necessary to trans any motion introduces risk and delicate anatomy. That's why you have vessel
dissections and perforations. They have to be careful about. And so what Stereotexas did is we
really transformed that whole mechanism of action by kind of making the catheter shaft very
soft and gentle, taking out pull wires, putting little magnets in the tip, and now using externally
applied computer controlled magnetic fields to take direct control of the tip of the catheter.
And when you take direct control of the tip of the catheter, you bypass all of those
mechanistic errors that take place when you have to control the handle in order to move the tip.
So that's really our robot is a computer controlled magnetic fields. They're on both
sides of the patient table in the, in the cath lab, and they allow you to really take a direct,
precise control of the tip of the catheter. Okay. Awesome. So when it is done mechanically,
what's the effect on the patient compared to when it's done robotically?
So we currently, the vast majority of our clinical experience has been in one specific type of
endovascular surgery called cardiac ablation. It's a procedure used to treat arrhythmias.
So in the procedure, if the heart is not beating regularly in the procedure,
catheter is navigated into the heart chambers. And then it's really kind of magical, but
physicians are able to, electrophysiologists, they're a subset of interventional cardiologists,
focus on rhythm, heart rhythm disorders, and they're able to use electrograms and use mapping
systems and other diagnostic tools to determine where are the misbehaving heart muscle cells
that are causing this arrhythmia. And they use an ablation catheter, typically with a RF,
a catheter that has kind of a tip that can deliver RF energy. And so as it goes to a tissue,
if you deliver RF energy, you can ablate that tissue. And they use kind of their diagnostic
tools and the movement of the catheter around the chamber to determine where they should
specifically ablate to isolate the misbehaving heart muscle cells and more to channel the
electrical signal in a specific path. And so that's a very common procedure. There's about,
let's say 1.2 million of those a year now around the world. And if you think about the challenge
with the manual catheters, again, you have to kind of control the tip in a very precise way,
right? If you ablate in the right spot, treat the patient, treat the arrhythmia. If you ablate in
the wrong spot, you can cause significant damage. And so kind of when you can take direct control
of the tip and move the tip with precision and held the catheter in a very steady position
against the tissue. And you can do all of this with a very soft and gentle catheter,
which has a much lower risk of mechanically harming the patient. All of those provide value.
In addition, the physician is doing this entire procedure seated from a computer cockpit.
So they're not exposed to radiation. They're not kind of standing at the bedside near the
x-ray system. So that's really kind of the transformation we typically see ourselves used.
And actually, you're in the UK, obviously, one of them are kind of great physician users.
He's a physician, she operates at the Royal Brompton Hospital in London, relatively close
to you, I believe. And then, and she uses us at predominantly in pediatric and complex congenital
patients. So, you know, people who had a congenital heart disease had many surgeries over
their childhood. And because of that, oftentimes, that vast majority of times, they they then kind
of have arrhythmias as they become older. And those patients is oftentimes very difficult to
navigate. It's a non normal anatomy of the patient, because it has been adjusted through
many surgeries. And if you think a typical catheter that can only do one deflection,
you oftentimes have difficulty reaching where you need to break with a catheter that's being
steered from the tippy to do many bends and twists and turns, and can still move with great precision,
you can reach areas that otherwise would be unreachable. So she has kind of many publications
on on treating these patients that otherwise have no other options. Again, those are kind of
the things that make us delighted to work in the medical device field. And when you see procedures
like that take place. Awesome, awesome. And we touched a little bit on it. And with the surgeon
benefit as well, why is it so important to have the patient that the surgery removed from bedside
and controlling it from behind a screen? So I think kind of there's maybe two things I
touched upon kind of briefly the idea of being removed for radiation removed from x ray. And
that's, I'd say the more kind of simplistic direct benefit. And there, if you think about it with
leopard with open surgery, obviously, you have direct visualization of the surgical theater of
where you're operating. And laparoscopic surgery of a camera that allows you to view the area that
you're operating with it. In endovascular surgery, x ray is one of the primary forms of visualization,
because you don't have a camera that at the tip of the catheter, and really kind of x rays have been
for decades now, the predominant form of visualization, as much as you bring in
alternative forms of visualization, like ultrasound, ice imaging, or mapping systems,
or electrograms, or kind of other tools, x ray remains a very dominant form of visualization.
And x rays aren't great for patients. But as a patient, you might be exposed to 20 minutes worth
or 40 minutes worth or hours worth in a procedure. And a physician is exposed to the cumulative
impact of thousands of procedures over their career. And there's there's fairly interesting
clinical data, generally on the interventional cardiologist, and how and on how disruptive,
how dangerous that long term career exposure is. And for time, there was a actually very
interesting article out of Israel, a few years ago, that looked at brain tumors in interventional
cardiologists. What was interesting was that there was about a 90% rate of brain tumors on
their left side of their brain versus on the right side of their brain, just because generally,
when they're standing in cath lab, they're standing on the patient next to the patient table
with their left side closer to the x ray. Obviously, the right side is also exposed to radiation.
But that was, I thought, an elegant way to try to assess the risk and the kind of increased risk
of tumors and of other kind of impacts of radiation. The a little bit less obvious,
but a little bit more interesting, I think, benefit from removing the physician from the
bedside, putting them behind a computer cockpit, is if you think about any operating physician,
they have really two major skill sets. They have the cognitive skill of trying to determine
what is the disease, what is the issue with the patient, how best to treat it,
how to design the therapy. And then they have this mechanical skill of getting tools at their
disposal to actually execute the procedure as they would want. And they need, obviously, both of these
skill sets in order to be as successful and kind of proficient surgeons. When you reduce the
mechanical side of the equation as much as possible, you allow the physician to focus most of
their energy on the cognitive side of their profession. And I think that is something that
generally, as a society, in many fields, humans have evolved to make the mechanical aspect of a
profession less and less, and to make the cognitive aspect kind of really the defining feature of a
profession. And I think that in operating procedures as well, in surgery, that general
trend towards reducing the mechanical effort, allowing the physician to focus as much of their
energy as possible on the design of the therapy of the cognitive side, that is likely to lead to
better outcomes, and it's likely to lead to a better profession. Okay. So there's a clear patient
benefit, clear surgeon benefit. Is there any benefit to the health system for the using
Stereotaxis Genesis? So generally, if you look, we're in, obviously, an NHS hospital.
We've done particularly well at sites like Kaiser in California. And I think that some of the reasons
why systems like that have agreed to take on a robot that still was relatively new,
that kind of adds cost generally, from a direct perspective, and to the procedure, is that there
are multiple and kind of downstream savings for hospitals for hospital systems. And from a
societal perspective, I'd say the two biggest benefits are one, the reduction of risk, and two,
the ability to treat patients that otherwise have no options. And from a reduction of risk perspective,
that is for the patient and for the physician. Patients, if you look at all the clinical
literature, and there's now about 450 or so clinical publications on our technology,
and quite a few, a few dozen that are head-to-head studies, what you see is consistently a reduction
in major adverse events for patients. So because you have this very soft, gentle catheter that is
being navigated through the blood vessels into the heart, you have a much lower risk of complications
than with a rigid catheter, where if by accident, the physician makes one sudden move,
could perforate the heart, could dissect a vessel, and they have to be much more cautious.
And so that obviously, the reduction of major adverse events, that leads to significant saving
overall for the health system. And then on the physician side as well, we have had physicians
who have used us because they have suddenly back pain, and they wouldn't be able to operate for a
week or two weeks, or they have other kind of health issues that would have otherwise limited
their skill with physicians. One of my nicest experiences walking to a hospital in Scandinavia,
and a physician I'd never met before comes to me, gives me a very big hug and says,
I, oh, I'm so grateful for your technology. I love my job. I love being a physician. I love
operating on patients. But I would have had to retire a few years ago if it wasn't for your
system, right? He still has a really sharp cognitive mind. But, you know, his hands are
probably getting kind of a little bit less stable, generally would have had to retire if not for the
ability to do procedures robotical. And I think that in all of those ways for a health system,
training physicians, then the loss of a physician because they can't operate because of that injury
or because of retirement, all those are significant burdens on society. And so being able to both
reduce the risk for patients and reduce the risk and enhance the experience for physicians,
all of those provide societal savings. And the other one kind of other flip side is on treating
patients that otherwise wouldn't be able to be treated at the overall burden on a health system
of a patient with a severe arrhythmia is relatively high, that they'll go, they'll be
hospitalized multiple times that go into the arm multiple times, they'll be on various drug
therapies that have relatively poor efficacy. And so when you can do an ablation procedure that
treats them definitively, that is overall a very beneficial procedure. And there's been
various publications over the years that have started to show more and more that ablation is
a very good option against best medical therapy in a range of arrhythmias. So I think you've seen
generally in this trend toward cardiac ablation has become more and more first line therapy.
And when you can provide that therapy to patients that otherwise wouldn't be able to be treated,
like often tax those that in the UK that I mentioned, that I think provides a societal
benefit as well. Okay, awesome. So when we were preparing for this podcast, you talked about
five big innovation efforts that started taxes. For the sake of the listeners, could you
just give us an overview of what they are and a bit more information on some of those?
Sure. So I'll just get briefly touch upon it. Otherwise, a list of five will be long.
But generally, our efforts have been to make robotics broadly accessible. So how do you make
a robot that is much more easily adopted by hospitals, reduce the cost of acquisition,
and really kind of makes it something that can be broadly used in any operating room environment in
any operating room environment in any cath lab. And so that's been kind of one big thrust.
A second big thrust is how do you build an open ecosystem and around the robotic technology in
electrophysiology in cardiac ablation procedures where we currently operate, you want to enable
the ability to have a range of therapeutic devices, and to work with a range of diagnostic
devices with a robot and not to limit your options to only one therapeutic catheter,
one diagnostic integration. So that kind of building of an open ecosystem, I think,
it's actually kind of a very rare thing for companies to do. I think that when you have
open ecosystems, that's how you drive the most innovation, that's how you reduce costs the most,
that's how you make something the most ubiquitous in a field. And so that's kind of been a big
effort of ours. And the third one is how do we expand the use of our technology into multiple
endovascular clinical applications so that we're not just treating patients with arrhythmias,
but also treating patients with stroke, with coronary disease, with peripheral vascular
disease. I think there's kind of multiple indications there that where we can provide
that value and address unmet medical needs. And the fourth effort is we entered in recently into
collaboration with Microfort in China, and we're working together with Microfort to build an
ecosystem of products that work with our robot in China. And so there's kind of a whole
development regulatory effort there. And then the fifth is we're communicating right now over a
Zoom-like telecommunication app. Obviously, the advent of cell phones have been one of the biggest
benefits to society and transformers of our lives over the last 20 years. And if you think about it,
operating rooms are very much isolated. They don't get the benefits of connectivity at all.
A physician who operates in an operating room has a support staff that's right there,
might be able to poke their head out into the hallway and shout to a colleague, but otherwise
it's very much isolated. And so how do you bring connectivity and collaboration into the operating
room environment? And that's an effort that is very synergistic with the entire robotic experience
that I think has applicability far beyond just robotic labs.
So I want to push a little bit further into the open ecosystem. What does that actually mean? And
what kind of things do you mean by having those contributions from the wider market?
So practically, or let me stay on the philosophy for a moment, and then I'll go to the practice.
Philosophically, if you think about economies or societies that do the best,
they're open societies, open economies. And when you have open societies, open economies,
that leads to competition, that leads to innovation, that leads to creativity and ideas,
it leads to choice. And in the end of the day, consumer choice, individual choice is a great
determiner of how things should evolve and a great motivator for progress. And so I think that
the concept of open ecosystems is a very powerful one in society, and one that actually has
applicability also in business. And stereotaxis intellectual physiology originally built its
business very much as a closed ecosystem. We had one ablation catheter that works with our
technology, and we were integrated with one diagnostic mapping system. And overall, that was
a nice solution for customers. It allowed physicians to treat patients in great ways to
deliver great care. But in many ways, it was also limiting in that it didn't allow for physician
choice of different technology that they would like to use. And it didn't allow for this robust
innovation around the robot, where you have a range of tools, and you're constantly pushing
the envelope of what's possible in terms of the tool set. And so we've really been trying to
kind of encourage and establish this open ecosystem around our robot, where a range of diagnostic and
therapeutic tools can be used with. In practice, what that meant is that, let's say on the diagnostic
side, is we implemented an open mapping API software into our robots, which made it much
easier to use our robot with a range of diagnostic and mapping technologies. And so we integrated
with an innovative mapping solution out of California, we integrated with various pre-operative
imaging companies that take pre-operative patient-specific images, and then make it really
specific for electrophysiology. And then we have ways to now present those pre-op images with the
intraoperative map over an x-ray, integrate all of those together, really kind of in a way that
allows physicians to see all the patient-specific information in as easy of a way as possible,
and make decisions during the operation. And so kind of that was one way that implementation
of an open mapping API on the software side really kind of helped on integrating various
diagnostic tools, and allowing physicians to benefit from a range of diagnostic tools
during their procedure. On the therapeutic side, we took the initiative to actually build
our own ablation catheter, and we did that kind of for two purposes. One was just to push the
boundaries of ablation catheter technology, and to make sure that there was newer catheter technology
out there available for physicians, and that kind of we would make the investment in
pushing that forward. But we also did it because when you build a catheter on your own, you learn
all sorts of insights into what plastics get used, what coils get used, what are the
small insights that makes a robotically magnetically driven catheter great,
and what are the pitfalls to avoid when designing and building a catheter. And then we use that
insight to actually facilitate a range of companies that are building similar catheters.
We've announced collaborations, let's say, with an Austrian company called AFRIZE. They're
developing an elegant cryon, what's called a Cooloo. It's kind of a single-shot device for
pulmonary vein isolation. They came to us at one of the conferences, thought that our technology
was particularly elegant and interesting, and said, oh, we'd love to be able to make a robotically
driven version of our catheter. And so we're able to facilitate that by sharing all sorts of insights
with them to help them develop a robotically navigated version of their catheter. The same
thing with Microport in China. We're able to facilitate their progress in developing both
diagnostic and therapeutic catheters that will work with the robot. And we've worked also with,
and we're working with a couple others that we haven't been able to announce yet,
that are also kind of interested and have been developing catheters. And so I think that that,
what kind of that overall leads to is as I look out over the next several years,
is this world where our robot and the mechanistic benefits of precision, stability, and safety
reach can be paired with a range of both therapeutic and diagnostic devices. And ultimately,
that's good for physician choice. That's good for reducing cost and for overall patient care.
Awesome. So what's your approach to corporate development then? So it sounds like you've
touched on a couple of partnerships that you've worked on, but M&A partnerships, joint ventures.
What's your approach and strategy there? I guess the general approach is you have an open
hand for collaboration and you take responsibility and self-sufficiency in doing things on your own.
And that combination of being self as efficient and responsible while maintaining the open hand
for collaboration, that seems to lead to progress on both fronts. Okay. So what are some of the
biggest challenges that Stereo Tax has faced historically? I think kind of we've had a range
of challenges. So if you look at our history, we have a relatively long history and there's been
a range of challenges over the year to really build a highly successful company. And I'd say
that kind of probably it fits into a few buckets. One is kind of when we initially launched and the
technology was adopted with great fanfare and we sold kind of over 20 systems a year in those first
few years of the launch. But at the time, the technology was launched somewhat prematurely
and a little bit aggressively prior to when it was ready for prime time. And it had a significant
latency at the time. So when a physician is operating, their CDP had a large screen display,
they use a mouse and keyboard to do the procedure. And you can imagine that if there's a latency of,
let's say three seconds, or every time you move your mouse, by the time it moves the catheter,
there's a, it's taken three seconds. That's a type of latency that would drive a physician crazy.
So I, I've kind of used an analogy that if I am, if you take all of your notes on paper and pen,
and I come to you and give you a laptop, and I say, this laptop is great. And you could take
your notes on the laptop and you can do spell check and you could do editing and you can adjust
the thoughts and you can share it easily with colleagues. And, you know, all of these reasons
why taking notes on a laptop would be a beneficial versus kind of pen and paper. And, but then I give
you the laptop and there's a latency of three seconds every time you want to move, right? You
would say, David, you might be right. Many of these benefits are great, but practically I can't use it.
I'm going back to a pen and paper. So there was kind of a similar event at the time. And, and that
kind of led to a, a kind of a negative feedback loop where, where as hospitals started to adopt
the tech, started to purchase the technology, tried to use it, didn't find it very practical.
This robot sat idle at the hospital, hospital B that is looking to purchase a health assistant
sees hospital A purchase it, isn't using it and, and steps back from the purchasing line.
And with that, suddenly sales plateau, sales start to decline. Like most young companies and
stereotaxes was spending with expectation of significant growth. Suddenly you have to pull
back expenses. You have to do that with the financing, your stock price drops, and that
becomes kind of a negative feedback loop. So that's really kind of, I'd say was the toughest, if you go
back to the history, that's kind of the toughest challenge that stereotactors face is it got itself
stuck in this negative feedback loop. And, and, and what we've been doing to overcome that is really
have a focus on existing users with the concept that when you have successful labs that are able
to do procedures, well, are able to treat patients well, are able to be efficient, that that ultimately
leads to broader adoption because people see that success and want to mimic it at their own
institutions. And our technology did become, we reduced the latency over the years through
improvements in patrol software and hardware. And, and so kind of overall have made it a very
practical device. That's why we have now a hundred hospitals globally that use us on a regular basis
that treat kind of collectively 150,000 patients. But that said, that's something that took time to
improve the technology in that way. And, and, and obviously is that we're still getting over that
historical perception that this was technology that really was elegant, but not practical.
Now I think it's practical. We have to show the world that it is practical.
Okay. Awesome. So what's some of the barriers to people adopting it still? Is it,
is it just that history or do, are there any other concerns when people are looking
to potentially purchase the system? I think that the three big concerns are where
our big innovation thrusts are focused on. So one is how do you make the technology much more
accessible and affordable right now? Adopting a robot is a construction process that involves
some architectural planning. It involves contractors. There's an installation process
that takes a few weeks. And so if you can make a robot that is, that doesn't require any of the
construction, any of the architectural planning, and that can be installed relatively quickly over
the weekend or deinstalled, that reduces the structural limitations to adoption significantly.
And the second one is intellectual physiology. As you move from having very little choice,
diagnostic therapeutic devices to an array of choices that reduces one of the pushbacks
against adoption in that now you do have a range of tools that you're disposable to use
with the robot. And so that's kind of been a second big thrust that addresses the second big
limitation that, that physicians have had. And then the third one is, is that when you,
when you have a single use robot for specific clinical application, that is limiting versus
a platform robot that can be used for a range of clinical applications. I think when we speak with
hospitals, when we speak with potential purchasers of the robot, and there's a concept that one plus
one is worth more than two, and one plus one plus one is worth much more than three. And so I think
as we're able to build out the tool sets, guide wires of guide catheters that allow our robot to
provide value for stroke patients, for coronary interventional cases, for abdominal aortic
aneurysms, for peripheral disease, and suddenly you have a robot that becomes much nicer for a
hospital to adopt. And I'd say those are the three innovations that are the most impactful
on the adoption process. And I think we'll have the biggest kind of a tailwind in driving
kind of a broad scale adoption of our technology. Okay. So broadly speaking then, early on in the
conversation, we talked about laparoscopic robotics and we talked about orthopedic robotics.
Why do you think there hasn't been the adoption in endovascular robotics? Because Stereotax is
not the only company here. So why is a general market do we think there's not been the adoption
that other markets have experienced? I think endovascular robotics is particularly challenging.
And so those are kind of specific things that we can talk about. And then there's also aspects of
luck, right? And chance at if intuitive surgical and computer motion at the time, right? 20 years
ago, as they emerged, they had a lot of challenge. And they were first trying to transform
cabbage surgeries, bypass graft, coronary bypass surgeries. And they had a lot of
challenge in that field. And still there's fairly little adoption. They were fortunate that
urologists took on the technology and it started to fly. And with that momentum breeds momentum.
And so there was a significant kind of then adoption across laparoscopic surgeries. And
similarly, if you think about orthopedic robotics, and Mako was really the pioneer in knee and hip
upper plastic. And if you think about it, Mako actually was struggling at some point.
And before they were acquired by Stryker, they had a year plus of relatively very flat growth.
And there were kind of some struggles that they had to go through. And yet when Stryker acquired
them, suddenly Stryker built its entire ecosystem around the robot. And it took a few
years to really build its implantation ecosystem and its tool sets and its implants around the
robot. But since then has taken market share in a field that relatively had very stable market shares
and has taken market share every year to the point where I believe now about 55 60% of all
of their knee implants are done on the Mako robot. And I think about 30 35% of its hip implants
are done on the Mako robot. And so sometimes oftentimes, slight and changes in the course
of history can have dramatic impacts on overall adoption in a field. I think in both of those
cases, there was obviously significant and effort and success that led to that. But there were also
sometimes little lucky changes, little lucky breaks that change the course of history.
That in that in, in, if I speak just about some of the fundamental challenge of endovascular
robotics versus for example, laparoscopic or orthopedic robotics, in both laparoscopic surgery
and orthopedic surgery, you're talking about relatively rigid, straight tools. And, and that
is more akin to what you typically think about a robot. And when you think about endovascular
robot, you need something that is very flexible, and, and very delicate and very small, right?
Blood vessels are tiny overall, and they're very delicate tissue. And, and, and they have all sorts
of tortuosity to them. And so to think about a robotic solution that is useful in that environment,
it doesn't lend itself to the typical views of what a robot is. And, and I think that's something
that's important. And that's why a robot is not a robot is not a robot. There have been several
attempts to robots in the field. And I think generally those have been met with relatively
lackluster success. And, you know, the Hanson is one example over the years, they used a mechanism
of action where they used many additional pole wires in the catheter to provide additional
degrees of motion and earn the sheath. The challenge there is that on the one hand, that
allows for additional degrees of motion. The challenge is when you add many pole wires,
you make a catheter much thicker and you make it much more rigid. And that wasn't particularly safe
and delicate anatomy. They had higher rates of adverse effects. And so that mechanism of action
could have been elegant, but it wasn't very practical in the vascular system. It actually
got used ultimately in the lungs. And that was probably a beautiful pivot for that, to use it
in the lungs, which are less delicate, where you have a little bit bigger space and where that kind
of mechanism of action could work. Another mechanism of action that has been tried is
Corindus, which is obviously now part of the Siemens family. And while it has certain elegance
to it, and it also has significant weaknesses that yes, it's easy to adopt, it's relatively
a simple robot, but it mimics the human hand. It allows a physician to be seated at a cockpit,
but really it doesn't allow in each vaginal tool to do anything beyond what it typically would do.
You still have all the translational errors of holding and applying control at the handle or at
the one end of a guide wire and trying to move it a meter away at the other end. And
robotic precision at this end doesn't improve necessarily at all the movement at this end,
because most of the challenge is imprecision that lies over that meter length. And so I think kind
of those are some of the reasons why other mechanisms of actions have struggled. And
as Stereo Texas, again, it hasn't been an easy path, but I think as you think about
applying our mechanism of action in a way that is broadly accessible, easily adoptable by hospitals,
and that can be applied to a range of clinical applications, that starts to allow you to
change the adoption curve in a much more meaningful way.
Okay, understood. And so we've got Gen 1 out in the market, we've got the Genesis system out
on the market, is there a Gen 2 in the works? And is it going to be the Genesis system and
just improvements? Or are you working on something that is completely outside of
the kind of Genesis chassis and model?
Yep, so we got FDA approval for Genesis exactly three years ago now, and launched it then. And
that was really the first big structural innovation on the robot side. In over 15 years,
Stereo Texas originally launched the NIOBI system in the 2004 or so timeframe. And then it had
improvements to the control software and some motors in the 2010-11 timeframe to address the
latency issue, but really kind of deal with the same overall architecture until Genesis came out
in 2020. And we have announced that we're developing a second generation robot that
uses many of the innovations that we made in Genesis, it leverages and stands upon those
shoulders, but it is completely new system. And that will really provide for the ability to
install the system without major structural contract work, architectural work, and it's
self-shielding. So the magnetic fields are kind of contained within the robot themselves,
so that you don't need to do a shielding of the walls of the room, that you don't need
to do structural reinforcement of the floors. We've done things like on the power side,
and making sure that you can use traditional wall outlets rather than have special power
requirements. We did a range of things to make it a broadly accessible robot.
Okay, awesome. Are you allowed to share any timelines on that at all?
We are a publicly traded company, so I can share what has been said publicly. We just
had our earnings call last week. So we talked about actually doing a limited launch of the robot
in Europe before the end of this year, and expanding that launch next year.
Cool, good stuff.
So it's relatively in the late stages of development and the testing and then regulatory
process.
That's awesome. And I bet the dates from the investor call, how do you feel about
the year results from the stereo taxes that you've just announced?
Sorry, what was the question? The what from stereo taxes?
The investor meeting. So I've read the notes from it,
and I'd love to find out what your thoughts are on the last year's results.
So I think overall, we've benefited from having an investor base that understands our overall
vision of how we want to transform endovascular surgery, and has been supportive in that.
And that has allowed us to have a balance sheet that is relatively
solid and allows us to be self-sufficient. So we haven't had to raise money from the
capital markets. We're able to fund our business in a self-sufficient way.
And we have a very nice cadre of investors, both industry executives, healthcare specialists,
that support us well. So overall, it's been a very supportive capital markets.
I'd say that if I look just at last year, generally, from a revenue perspective,
it was somewhat disappointing. We saw increased orders of our robot, but less revenue recognition
of installations of our robot, just as hospitals have had delays in construction. And so we've had
kind of a building backlog of orders that we haven't yet been able to fill as revenue recognition.
So I think when you look at the optics of our results, and 2022 was more difficult of a year.
From a fundamental perspective, I'm overall pleased with the progress we're making.
As in most things, progress is a grind. And so we're a small company, we're advancing many things,
both on the innovation side and on the commercial side. We're doing it in a financially prudent
fashion. And that means that progress is a grind. Oftentimes things go slower than you wish.
But with all of that, I think that we've made big strides forward last year. And overall,
I think the investment community kind of recognized that in both the questions that
they had on the earlier call and the reaction afterwards. Good stuff. So I know you've got a
lot of faith in this company because in preparation for this podcast, I stumbled across a piece of
information about your executive pay and copying Elon Musk's kind of model. Could you tell me more
about that? I found that really interesting. Sure. So as you mentioned, I have a relatively
very modest salary. And almost all of my compensation comes from a stock-based plan,
which provides me ownership in stereo taxes at various milestones, various evaluation milestones.
So stereo taxes is valued at $1 billion, $1.5 billion, $2 billion, up through $5.5 billion.
Roughly, it ends up being 1% of the company at each of those milestones. So I have the potential
to own up to 10% of stereo taxes at that $5.5 billion milestone. And I'm grateful that the board
and shareholders agreed to a compensation plan like that. It obviously reduces significantly
what I would take home in any given year, but it provides different type of motivation and
alignment of interest. And I think that in business generally, alignment of interest
is probably one of the most important concepts in business. And so being able to have a
compensation plan that fully aligns my interests with the long-term success of the company.
And just kind of another caveat is that those stock res, I am locked up for a 10-year period.
And so it really kind of motivates long-term thinking, not short-term volatility in stock,
not short-term kind of artificial inflation evaluation. And so I think kind of having that
long-term alignment of interest, that is a beautiful motivator. And it is beautiful in
reducing clutter, reducing kind of any motivations that wouldn't be alive with long-term success
of the company. And in medical devices, and particularly in complex medical devices,
you need to have a long-term outlook because what you do today, the efforts that you do today
really only help the company for the most part in three, four, five years from now, right? You're
always skating to a puck that is several years out. And so I think kind of having that long-term
alignment is kind of beneficial for the company. It was motivating for me and kind of overall,
I hope and think it's going to serve the company well.
Brilliant. So getting into a billion dollar valuation, I know we've talked about some of
the pillars to do with technology and innovation, but what are some of the other
pillars that are going to get stereo taxes to a billion dollar valuation?
So my overall goal is at five and a half billion, just to be clear, right? One billion is the lowest
master. But I think kind of overall, right, you want to have a technology that can be broadly
adopted, and you want to have a technology that can provide clinical value across a range of
meaningful unmet medical needs. That's really kind of where, as I go back to our innovation effort,
that gets to, you want to have a robot that can ultimately be installed in thousands of
cath labs around the world. And when you have structural limitations that make it that 90%
of physicians that want a robot don't end up having it, those are the types of things that
you need to break down. And then ultimately, just having robots out there in the field,
if they're not being used, that's actually more of a liability than an asset. So really kind of,
you want to have the tool sets that allow physicians to use your robot, and to have
great clinical outcomes, and to have successful labs, and efficient labs, and to have delightful
procedures for them. You want to have that type of tool set that's available both in
cardiac ablation, electrophysiology, and in interventional cardiology, and interventional
neurology, and vascular surgery. And that's kind of, I think as we build that tool set,
as we build the new robot, as we build a commercial organization that is able to provide
the right level of service to customers, and is able to support them in their efforts to build
successful robotic practices, as we're able to manufacture robots, as an operating team,
we're able to operate the company, and run clinical studies, and run regulatory processes
well, right? It's kind of, you need to have, a company's complicated, there's many,
and it's like a human body itself, that you could have everything works well, if one organ doesn't
work well, the patient dies, right? So you need to, you need to have kind of all aspects of the
company working well together, but as you build that type of product ecosystem, and the ability
to execute kind of on that product ecosystem, that's really what I think makes those
types of valuation milestones very realistic. We've seen many examples in kind of the
history of companies with relatively modest revenue, that have been acquired in the billion
dollar plus range, because they have a robotic technology that will transform a specific field
of medicine, and obviously intuitive surgical is now valued at nearly a hundred billion dollars,
given the way that they transform laparoscopic surgery, and our goal is to do a similar thing
in endovascular surgery. Okay, perfect, perfect. So we can see at the market at the minute, and
this is not just across surgical robotics, it's across the wider market, companies are making
layoffs, there could be economic headwinds into the future, are you seeing the signs?
Generally, it is a tough environment, right? You have on the one hand, hospitals have been pressured
for many years now, by COVID, by staffing shortages, by all sorts of operational challenges,
and a financial downturn does impact our hospital customers as well.
So generally, I think you've seen growth over the last three years at our company,
despite us operating in a headwind like environment. And so that is a challenge. And
then on the operating side, there are all sorts of operational challenges and cost related challenges.
So you've generally inflation of costs of materials of various costs across the company,
and you have challenges like MDR, and other regulatory and operational challenges that
crop themselves up regularly. So I'd say that yes, is a overall from macro perspective,
it has been an environment of headwinds, rather than of tailwinds. And that said, I think that,
you know, that said, those are things that you just work through. And when you have a good team,
and when you have a overall good product and good field, you work through those challenges,
and you build a successful company through them. And you can't expect to build great companies
through tailwind environments. Working through headwinds actually makes you stronger and makes
you kind of a better company overall. So I don't, you know, focus on what you can control,
not on what you can't control. And on that, you know, I don't think too much about macro things
that are outside of our control. And from a, from kind of a general kind of environment,
I think that we have been able, well, despite those headwinds,
well, they do make like more difficult for me is that they're kind of slower than what you would want.
Cool. And so what do you think the business stereo taxes will look like in
five, 10 years time? What do you have as the vision for it?
Look at how intuitive surgical transformed laparoscopic surgeries between 2000 and 2010.
I hope that we do the same thing over the next decade.
Okay, cool. And what do you think about the wider surgical robotics markets? I know we're only
focused in endomascular here, but this podcast is about all the surgical robots, no matter what
indication they go into. So what do you think is going to be some of the key trends and drivers?
And what's the future of robotic surgery look like?
Sort of think if you look at laparoscopic surgery and orthopedic surgery, to that extent,
you're now having, you're moving from an environment where there was one robotic solution
to having multiple robots that are relatively competitive with each other. And so that's kind
of, I think there's easily a dozen laparoscopic surgical robots that are either on the market or
in development. Intuitive surgical still has kind of a significant lead over the competition,
but they are being chased by many competitors. And in orthopedic surgery also pretty much every
company that operates in the hip, knee, spine surgical field has to have a robotic solution
or they're viewed as kind of behind the times. And if you think about kind of probably the biggest
focus and evolution of robots in those fields over the next decade is probably going to be
this development and progress on the concept of digital surgery. And so robots are being used
predominantly still almost exclusively still for their mechanistic benefits, precision, stability,
a safety profile, then whether the DaVinci is being used or a Mako robots being used from
Azores being used, those are kind of the reasons why physicians use them. And this concept of
digital surgery has been discussed a lot, but it's still relatively in its infancy. And so I think
over the next decade, you'll see much more playing out there. And when I think about digital surgery,
I think about really four specific things. I know these all kind of sound a little bit more like
catchwords and they sound words that sound impressive, but don't have a lot of substance
behind them. And it's easy to get it lost in that when you talk about things like digital surgery,
I think kind of there are very specific things that can provide real value in the operating
environment to physicians, to the patients, to the hospital. The four that kind of we think about
with our own robot and that we work on are specifically image integration. So talked a
little bit before, how do you take a range of patient specific data presented during the operation
to the physician, the most elegant way to help in the decision-making during the procedure.
And so kind of this kind of bringing together of disparate patient specific information,
presenting it nicely to the physician that provides real value, I think, in the operating
room environment, both to the physician and ultimately to patient care. And the second big
one is automation. So if you can automate certain routine tasks during the surgery,
that allows for reduction of risk, reduction of monotony, speeding up certain parts of the
procedure. And I think that's kind of one where there's easily specific areas of various surgeries
that can be done in an automated way. And that automation doesn't introduce risk. It actually
can reduce risk from a procedure. And a third one is this concept of connectivity. Like I discussed
before, how can you make it that a physician who's operating suddenly has a question and could call
upon a network of colleagues that might be able to provide an insight at that moment and steer
the procedure in the right way. So I think kind of as you can make operating rooms and connected
labs rather than siloed labs, that provides a real value the same way that the telecommunication
revolution for the last couple of decades has provided amazing values across our life.
You know, kind of the operating room has been immune to that. I think we can provide a lot of
value there. And then the fourth is this concept of big data. And we have 150,000 procedures that
have been performed on a robot. A company like Intuitive Surgical has over a million procedures
performed annually on their robot. How do you take all of the data from all those robotic procedures
and turn that data into information and then into useful insights that can guide decision-making
during the procedure? That is a tough challenge. But I think that's where ultimately that you rule
surgical fields from fields that evolve based on heuristics and based on kind of
sharing of information in a very inefficient fashion through conferences, through discussions.
I'm going to try to do three procedures and see how I feel to a field that is much more data-driven.
And so I hope kind of that also, that will be a tough one to crack,
but I hope over the next decade we start to make some progress there.
Perfect. I really like those. There's a lot of those words being thrown about, so automation,
digitization of the procedures, and lots of companies are focusing on that. But getting
into the details of it, it's very, very complex. And I'm not sure who's going to win these battles,
but there's a lot of companies working on them. And then the final question for this podcast,
what advice would you give to people who are looking to enter the surgical robotics space,
either from med tech companies and looking to move into a more high technology field,
and then also an academic level, what should these guys be focusing on and how do they enter the space?
That is a great question and a difficult one to answer. I mean, first of all, I'd say to anyone
who's interested, that it's a fascinating field that I fully encourage you to try to enter it.
And it's beautiful for a few reasons. You combine medicine and patient care, which is intrinsically
motivating and interesting. We're all ultimately patients of these technologies. Being a patient is
still overall miserable. There's a lot of unmet medical need out there. So being able to work
kind of pushing the boundaries of care forward is intrinsically motivating. Robots are particularly
exciting of a technology because they combine, they're very interdisciplinary from an engineering
perspective. You need macro hardware and microbe instruments and electronics and firmware and
control software and UI software. And all of that has to work really, really well together with
really kind of no margin for error because the patient's on the table. And so working with those
ranges of technologies all together and bringing them together as one cohesive solution is very
challenging and also intrinsically very interesting. And then the business side of it is also
interesting. The medical device field is a complex business, unlike basic product, a cup. The
purchaser of a cup is a relatively well understood purchaser. I want to buy a cup for my house. I'll
buy it based on that, how functional it is, how elegant it is, and what its cost is. And to some
extent, it's a simpler marketplace. And if you think about medical devices, it's a complex
marketplace because the purchaser isn't a specific party. It's usually a collective mix of the
patient, the physician, the provider, the hospital, and the payer. And all four of these kind of key
parties to the equation each have their own incentives and disincentives in adopting a
specific technology. And you have to think about all of that. So building a business in this field,
thinking about commercialization, thinking about the regulatory challenges, the manufacturing
challenges, the various organizational challenges, that is a complex business. So I think when
you combine kind of medicine, complex technology, a complex business field, that lends to kind of
actually a fascinating area. Practically, I haven't given you advice on how to actually enter the field.
As I don't know, each of us said they have to kind of find our own way. And personally, then
I'd say that maybe the two things that have kind of helped me the most in my own
personal career over time is one is I interned. And wherever I had an opportunity to work,
I would kind of join being motivated by what is going to challenge me the most and what's
going to teach me the most versus trying to optimize any short-term earnings. That's why
probably I entered similarly to the co-op structure I did here, because I generally haven't
been motivated by short-term earnings. I've been motivated by where can I learn the most,
where can I be challenged the most? And so kind of that generally has, I think, served me well.
And then the other thing is this concept of not being afraid of moving forward and not to allow
yourself to freeze in life. There's a beautiful, it's a rabbinic saying that says that the entire
world is a very narrow bridge, and the important thing is not to be afraid. And I think kind of
that concept of you can always freeze in life. All of us are afraid. You know, kind of as CEO
of a company, you can look at me and say, you seem confident, you seem this. All of us go through
fears and go through challenges. And up till probably the president of a country, the prime
minister of a country, everyone has doubts and concerns and fears in life. And I think kind of
one of the important things is to be able to recognize those fears, not to subdue them,
but to be able to kind of advance despite them. And so I think kind of if you have those two
mindsets, probably more generally, that's going to serve people well in life.
Fairfax. Thank you very much, Dave, for joining me on The Surgeables Podcast. It's been a pleasure.
It's great. Thank you very much, Henry.
