Welcome to the Surgery Bots podcast, the show where we explore the latest
advancements in surgical robotics and how they're transforming healthcare.
Every two weeks we sit down with a guest who is at the forefront of this
incredible space. Surgical robotics is changing the way we approach surgery. Our
guests are going to share their experiences and insights discussing the
challenges they've faced and successes they've achieved. We'll also delve into
the latest trends and innovations, exploring the newest robotic technologies
and how they're being used to improve patient outcomes. Whether you're a
healthcare professional, a researcher or just interested in the latest
advancements in surgical robotics, this podcast is for you. So join us as we
explore the world of surgical robotics and discover how these cutting-edge
technologies are shaping the future of medicine.
Hello and welcome to today's episode of the Surgery Bots podcast. In today's
episode we sit down with Pedro Costa, who's CEO of Interventional Systems.
Within Interventional Systems, Pedro has started off as an engineer, wore many
hats within the business and growing up with the company, to very recently take
on the CEO step. In the episode we talk about the various different partnerships
that the company has, the multi-platform indications that the system can be used
for and the benefits of low-cost robotics and different ways you can take
it to the market. So without further ado, I hope you enjoy this episode.
So welcome Pedro to this episode of the Surgery Bots podcast, it's a pleasure to
have you here. Likewise, thanks for inviting me. No problem at all. So
first off, can you give some context to the audience, give me a snapshot resume
if you will. Well I'm a Portuguese 31 year old biomedical engineer. My
background is, as I said, just in engineering. I have a specialised in
medical devices and after university I've had a small stint on research in
cranial neurosurgery and this kind of propelled me to join Interventional
Systems in 2016, moved to Austria, was able to run a couple of projects
within the company. The most exciting project was when we developed the
Stealth Autoguide robotic system and then moved back home to Portugal, living
on the seaside, which it's a big part of my personality and something I love
a lot to talk about, as you know. And since then I've been part of the
product management team at Interventional Systems and recently was
asked to take the helm of the company, which very much humbles me and
makes me very happy since I'm here, almost since the inception. Being the
third oldest in the company thus far, even though being relatively young, it
has been a great opportunity to be part of this journey. Fantastic. So who are
Interventional Systems and what do you do? Interventional Systems is a medical
device manufacturer of robotic, miniature robotic devices. We have
started as an interventional radiology and oncology company, so our goal was to
aid on the positioning of biopsy needles, ablation probes, catheters or any kind of
instrument that you insert percutaneously in the body. However, when
we developed our technology we understood that the right positioning
for our image-guided system was on the minimally invasive surgical
space. So we ended up, we started with a system that was indicated for radiology,
but we very fast pivoted technologically to a surgical platform because we
believe that we can more or less standardize the workflow based on any
kind of image guidance solution. And that's where we're headed. We are
an Austrian-based company. We have several offices across Europe and our
focus is and continues to be on supporting percutaneous procedures the
best way possible. A very innovation and R&D focused company. We are starting our
first steps on the commercialization. Even though we are a ten-year-old
company, we have always been very much focused on innovation and R&D. That's
what the heart beats for. And ultimately we are a company that is
focused on, of course, commercializing our products in our core markets, which
currently are the interventional radiology and oncology markets and
kidney stone management markets, but also through strategic partnerships such as
the one we have with Axelas for spine surgery or the one we've had with
Medtronic for the cranial project, which I mentioned before. Fantastic. So take me
back to the beginning. How was the business formed? So I was not there at
the time. We had two founders, Dr. Michael Vogele and Thomas Pfeiffer. He was the
original CEO and Thomas is still our CFO. The company spun off out of Electa
actually. So Michael had founded his initial company, Medical Intelligence, and
I don't know if you've ever heard about it, the Exapod couches for
patient positioning in radiation therapy. He was the inventor of it. His
company developed it and the company ended up being acquired by Electa and at
the time Electa was solely focused in radiation therapy. So Michael got the
rights to the IP that already, the initial IP for the robot was developed
at that time and he spun off and created the interventional systems with
Thomas and we are here since then. So we reverted a bit the challenge, which was
in the beginning we positioned the patients and now we thought, well, how
about positioning the instruments instead? So that's how we started. So when
you joined the business, what did the business look like and how's that
changed over time? We were a very, very small company. During the first years
even our R&D was in cooperation with a competence center called Atmit in
Austria. We had a very tiny and lean structure as a company. I joined the
company specifically for the cranial neuro project because it was the big
first milestone for the company. In the early days it was all about, you know,
research and clinical validation, initial clinical trials and so on. We did have
some interesting market pull, mostly from distributors across the world, because we
do have a cost-effective solution, a very inexpensive robot compared to the
typical industrial robots style you find in the market. So a lot of traction was
happening, but of course the market was not ready at the time. So we ended up
having a very good engineering team in place, basically no marketing and sales
at all, even though there was interest in the market. And I joined specifically to
help and to work in the cranial neuro project and therefore at the time we
were solely focused in R&D and that's what I joined to be an engineer
essentially. Okay, so you're kind of a homegrown talent within the business. You
joined as an engineer, you've gone through your journey with the company
and now taking the top step of the CEO. So tell me about the journey you've been
on and how that's equipped you for taking on this challenge. Well, if you
join a company when basically you are four or five people you got to do a bit
of everything from basic administration to project management to actual coding
and other things. It has been a very good experience because when we joined
basically the culture Michael and Thomas created at the time is that if you
have the capabilities, if you have the willingness and if there is the space
you can do more things. So ultimately as I'm a very hyperactive person in work I
like to do a lot of things and if I see something undone I like to go there. I've
had the chance to experiment a little bit. So when we started the project I was
contributing as part of, you know, I had a very strong foundation on the research
and the cranial neurosurgery workflow. So the clinical part was more or less
something that I started with. Risk management related stuff, requirements,
testing and so on. But at the time we were also asked to well improve, bring
our quality system to a level that a big strategic would be comfortable with in
terms of a product developed within that quality system. So eventually I was
asked to take care of the quality system, processes remediation. This allowed me to
connect, you know, with the operations team, with manufacturing, quality,
customers. And when you build such thing you build an armamentarium of
information and know-how that helps you throughout your journey. And ultimately I
came out of that project which I ended up leading to the end. As somebody
that was basically deep into any topic of the company, be it operations, be it
marketing and sales. And it was kind of a natural route. I helped develop this
product so it was natural to end up being the project the product manager
for the product. And of course with more and more responsibility and a bit
of experience and being exposed proactively by the management to more
business related and management related topics it was kind of a natural
progression. As we are a product driven company, R&D driven company, it was
natural that, you know, the successor CEO would be somebody that
was coming from the product side. So I was very lucky that somebody, you
know, took the chance to believe in an inexperienced Portuguese guy and at the
same time give them the opportunity to learn and to advance. So it was,
it's been very interesting. So MicroMay is the robot. So talk me through the
technology and how it's unique. We started this where everybody started,
with these large industrial robots, you know, pedestal based, mounted next to the
table. We tested all of them, the Stoevler robot, the KUKA, the Pumar,
everything. And when we looked at it we thought we can either be a
software company that takes these typical robots and makes a design,
incremental improvements on software and some kinds of adapters and they try to
sell off the company, or we go for groundbreaking innovation. So MicroMay
is something that came out of a wish to do a different robot, a better
robot, a robot that really fulfills the needs of a physician. It's a very small
robot, more or less the size of an iPad mini, mounted to the table through a
multifunctional arm, which is kind of a passive holding arm with seven
degrees of freedom. And the basic concept of the system is that it works
collaboratively with the physician. The physician is asked to manually position
the robot close to the region of interest. This is what we call gross
positioning. And then the fine alignment is done through, remotely, under
joystick control, either with a joystick, manually, or with automatic movements
based on a pre-operative planning or interoperative planning. The system
can have, optionally, a camera for optical tracking and a workstation, where
you can load DICOM data, plan the trajectory or trajectories, and then
command the robot from there. The system is compatible with CT imaging, cone beam,
CT fluoroscopy and fluoroscopy. We are working on developing the compatibility
with ultrasound. And we look at it as, let's call it, a smart tool holder. You
know, you can even say that it's not even a robot in the end, because it's a... we
call it a robot because of the actuation, motorization, and so on. But what we
really see is that it's an extension, kind of a third arm of the physician,
because the moment you have an image and you plan your trajectory, where you say
look, this is where I want to enter the body, this is where my needle needs to go,
with this trajectory I want to go through these structures, I want to avoid
these structures, based on my planning, the robot defines this accuracy vector
in space, aligned with which you deliver your instruments. And that's basically
what it is. And the rest of the features we have are related to things that we
identify that are important for image guided procedures. So, we don't have
reusable parts, all is disposable, because we try to keep things low-cost, especially
for the radiology market. The frontal part of the robot is fully
radiolucent, so you can image in real time and make corrections. This is one of
the most fundamental features we have. The fact that you can, at any point in
time, take a scan, or turn on slow-mo, or in the future have ultrasound connected
to the system, to see in real time where your target and instruments are, and
correct in situ what you are doing. Basic robotic solutions are nothing more
than navigation systems that allow you to overlay visual cues over static,
outdated images, based on navigation. And we don't want to do that, because it's
like we are always working in the past with the robots, right? You take a scan,
you plan it, and you start navigating with those static images that do not
show you anything about what's there. So we really designed the system to fit
inside the gantry, to be small, to be able to work with live imaging, because we
believe that this is what's gonna yield better accuracies. And the truth is, it
does. We provide some millimetric accuracy on procedures that are
fluoro-enabled, and this comes for sure from the fact that we can and are
able to do corrections throughout a procedure. Okay, so the MicroMate
supports a range of different surgeries. Can you talk more on some of the
surgical indications for the robot? So we are a classroom device that is
cleared for any image-guided procedure, from head to toe, as long as you use a
needle or a needle-type device. This means that if you are buying the system
or using it, one day you can be doing a lung biopsy, the next
procedure you do can be a kyphoplasty, afterwards you can be using it to place
a guide wire for an ortho procedure or spine procedure. As long as your
approach is with a needle or a needle-type device, you're good to go. As I
mentioned before, our focus in the core market has been in interventional
radiology and oncology, because this is where we started and, you know, we really
love this field, because it's a challenging field for a robotic device.
But we also commercialize a system for kidney stone treatments, so the procedure
is called percutaneous nephrolithotomy. It means that you do a percutaneous
access to the kidney, so that you can use the needle as the main access point to
then deliver a guide wire and an endoscope to treat kidney stones. But we
do have a lot of work done in other areas, like pelvic trauma, extremities,
fit and angle, you know, small drilling and small guide wire placement. These are
things we we've been doing. On a typical day, a radiologist with the system will
do a lot of biopsies, potentially a couple of ablations, you can do drainages,
you can do embolizations, as long as they are percutaneously. So ultimately,
the system does not have a single indication. It's an IR tool for IRs to
the targeting, and for surgeons it can be a targeting tool for their own procedures.
We understand that for some applications you need special clearances, like for
example spine surgery or whatever, because you need to link this
to a specific implant or to a specific workflow. But luckily in the IRAO space,
and most of the spaces outside orthopedics, you don't really need to
have special clearances for it. So you can use it for whatever, as long as it's
percutaneous and a needle type device, you're good to go.
Okay, so talk to me about some of the biggest benefits. You've talked, you've
touched on a couple of them, but what's the benefits of the patient, what's the
benefits to the surgeon, and what's the benefit to the health system?
So let's start with the patient, because that's what matters the most. We
support percutaneous procedures. These are less invasive procedures. Usually
with a needle, you just need to do a very tiny incision or even push the
needle directly through the skin. The fact that you have a much smaller
incision means that usually these procedures are done in an ambulatory or
outpatient setting. So the patient walks out in the same day, worst case stays in
vigilance overnight and walks out. It's also a system that allows you to do...
So we have been able to prove at our customer base that Micromate allows
procedures to be up to 20% faster and use 44% less radiation, because
targeting is much faster and much more precise, so you need to do less control
scans along the way. This for the patient means that there are less time under
anesthesia, means that you are doing less corrections, which means less punctures
through the skin, again less invasiveness. And of course in terms of
radiation, we don't want to expose the patient too much to radiation and
therefore this is one of obvious advantage. For the health system
and for even payers, we also need to consider that the system is very low
cost, so our price point is at 200,000 euros. This allows a relatively
fast return on investment, especially for high volume, if you increase your volume
of procedures, which you can by having a faster workflow. The
disposables are also close to 100 euros per case, so this allows to pay for the
system within the existing relatively low reimbursement that exists for these
procedures, which means that health systems and even payers will benefit
from this, because you can offer better treatment, better outcomes, without
incurring into very damaging costs or investments, because it's
important also to maintain the economical safety of the health system.
And for physicians, we're talking about doing faster procedures, being able to
have a hardware and software assistant for challenging
procedures. We are talking about movable lesions or very oblique
trajectories or approaches to the body that sometimes require you to be in
non-ergonomic positions or require you to take a lot of time to put the needle
in the right place. The system assists you with that, because it's there, it's
holding the needle, you can image at any time, so you will do it much faster
and more precise. Okay, and talking more on that price point then, so you could go
down the 200,000 euro price point and buy the system outright, but I also
saw that you offer robotics as a service. Could you give me a bit more information
on that? Well, I think, I like to use this statement because everybody says
after COVID, but it's true. After COVID, there is basically no stomach or very
little stomach for capital acquisitions. The investment that the health systems
needed to do to recover the services or even to keep up with the disease
treatment and with the waiting lists and everything, basically means
that there is not a lot of money for capital acquisitions, which basically
makes the wholesale process slower and even physicians that really believe in
technology, champion it, they need to go through a long approval process and
maybe, you know, they need to reprioritize, do I need a robot or do I need
sometimes, you know, a new ultrasound machine that can be used for many more
things. So, what we try to tackle here is these capital budgeting
constraints and by offering robotics as a service, you are able to subscribe to
the system. So, it's kind of a pay per month subscription. We have three
levels and you can pay kind of a variable amount based on the case volume
you want to get covered. We ship you the disposables, they arrive at your hospital
on time for the next month and you just pay per month. You don't need to pay for
the system, you just pay this kind of subscription. This allows us to bypass
these constraints and make a physician informed decision. Of course, they always
involve, you know, whoever owns the budget and the rest of the staff, but
ultimately there is operating budget that they can use to immediately get
return on their investment, because if they need to make smaller investments
monthly, with the efficiency gains they have with more patient
throughput, less operative time, less complications, they can start paying for
the system right away. And ultimately, they can acquire the system. It's not
really a leasing model, but you know, what we will do to a customer is, if you
have paid half of the system in subscriptions, we'll give you a large
discount and you can pay the rest of the unit. We just want to make sure it's
accessible, it's available to you and we will not push any customers or hospitals
to go into very strange, you know, financial solutions to acquire the
technology. We want it to be available, we price it at a point
that it is competitive, it allows us to run a relatively good business,
but at the same time allows hospitals to pay a fair price for good technology.
Cool, and do you produce your own instrumentation in-house as well, or do
you use off-the-shelf instrumentation? The system is agnostic, tool agnostic, so
we connect to any imaging device as long as they support direct
connection or PAX connection, and we can guide any instrument from 8 to 21 G, but
our regulatory clearance also allows us to customize our tool guides to
different geometries or different diameters. Right now we didn't have the
need to do it, but we can. So we don't have instruments, we don't have
therapeutic instruments. The way we see robotics is that it should be an
enabling technology, so it's something that you plug into your workflow as is,
as seamlessly as possible, to use the same instruments used now. So let's say
if you are using Surgibots, if you have an ablation company, you have a
Surgibots needle, we would fit and we'll be able, as a physician, to take the robot
and use your preferred needle with the system. We don't force you to use any
instrumentation, what we offer you is a tool guide with the right dimensions
that plugs with the system, it's a disposable tool guide, and then it
basically, this is the tool guide we align with the surgical trajectory you
defined, and then this gives you a working channel for your instruments.
Cool. How many systems are out on the market at the minute and being used on a
regular basis, and what kind of clinical number are you getting at the moment?
So we have done more than 4,000 procedures since we launched technology.
We have currently installed nine interventional radiology and oncology
systems. In the world we have eight to ten installations lined up for the next
year and a half. Of course, we don't only sell systems in the
interventional radiology and oncology alone, we also have our ventures with
Axella in Spain, and we also have a couple of joint ventures in China in our
core markets. Given the fact that we don't run the business, I'm not allowed
to disclose how many units we've sold to them, but we are able to sell
through these two lines. And in terms of kidney stone
treatment, we've just placed our first system last month. So we are in the, as
you've seen, we launched Lark Robotics, which is our subsidiary that's going to
run this business, and we have our first installation in Austria, close to our
headquarters, and it's just the infancy for that.
Perfect. So you talked about a couple of partnerships there, so let's go into a
bit more detail. So what's the partnership with Axella's like, and what
are these JVs like in China?
I'll start with Axella's. In 2019, we basically identified that the spine
market was in need for some, not only economical innovation, but you know,
something that would address the constraints related to practicality and
cost of having a robot in the OR. Similar to other fields, you have large
robots, large footprints that force you to work contralateral to the system that
do not allow you to use live imaging, very expensive units, and that were not
really suited to the ASC market. And we have identified it was the right moment
in time to work in this field, because ASCs were ramping up. Nobody really had a
strategy or was able to penetrate the ASC market, the global market, so the
out-of-US market. And we thought, look, we have the right footprint, the right
price point, and we have just validated our technology for cranial neuro. What's
good enough for the brain is good enough for the rest of the body. So we partnered
and teamed up with very seasoned individuals in the spine markets. We're
talking about Breath Clayton, everybody knows him in the markets, one of, you
know, big institutions in the field. Dr. Kevin Foley, we have, as part of Fusion
Robotics, which was our initial venture, also as an investor and partner in the
business, Alex Lukianov, which was an invasive CEO for a long time and also
running Sofomorganic before Medtronic's acquisition. So it was, we have big names,
good technology, and we developed this Fusion Robotics system at the time. This
was a true partnership between these two entities. We, of course, understood that
the robotic system cannot live alone. So we teamed up with a company in Florida,
Integrity Implants, they have the Flarehawk cage system, and they have, you
know, the rest of the tool, the spine instrumentation, screws and other types
of implants. And we teamed up to form Axellas. So Axellas ended up being a
merger between our joint venture Fusion Robotics and Integrity Implants. And now
we are running the business through Axellas. Interventional Systems is, at
this moment, of course, shareholder of the company, but also the exclusive
robotics supplier and robotics R&D partner. There is an R&D team there, but
we are also cooperating on a daily basis with them. And that's how we run the
business. In China, things are a little bit different. Usually, I think almost
every robotics Western company either crossed the opportunity to partner in
China or did it, because it's a big market, but it's a market that has its
own dynamics. There, usually, you look at things in a way that you want to have a
domestic product, because it makes the NMPA, so it's called the China FDA,
registration much smoother if you have a domestic product. So usually what
happens is that you team up with an implant company, and you develop the
product locally for this market. So we partnered with a company called Ningbo
Higran. They are not only a spine surgery, but also an interventional spine
and sports medicine company. So this allows us to, with one registration, to
tackle more markets. And we created a company called Sino Europe Microrobotics.
And basically, it's the same thing. We are a shareholder of the company, robot
supplier, R&D supplier. So this is how we work there. And there are then
different models. You can work in some fields with a true license, plus
royalties, you can work in a JV style, JV being the most normal way to do it.
Okay, so it's quite obvious why the China partnership happened. But why not
go direct in the US market? What's the big benefits of going down the
partnership route?
Well, implants run the business. I think robotics have been used for a long time
to lock the business, meaning that you have a robot, this robot has certain
capabilities, and you make sure that this robot, that it can build and
establish exclusivity frameworks around your implants. So the robot is nothing
but an enabling technology to allow you to target the body in a more accurate
way, but also to place your implants according to your surgical plan to lead
to better outcomes. The robots are not reimbursed, implants are. So
ultimately, who runs the business are the implant companies. And there has been
even before we started working there, there has been a consolidation in the
spine market where any company that has robotics also has implants and implants
are what makes the business. We were not an implant company. So for us, it was
obvious that we needed to partner. And when it comes to developing the robotic
system and the navigation system, the spine market has its own dynamics, you
really need seasoned professionals that know how to sell there, that know how to
run the business. And we were, and continue to be, a company that was born
in the radiology world. We did not understand, understood, we did not
understood, we did not control the dynamics of the spine market. And having
the chance to partner with people like Dr. Foley, Brad Clayton, and others, gave
us not only the depth and expertise, but also the impact in the field. If they
sign up for this, also shows that it's good technology that is serious, they
are putting their seal of approval on it. And for us, it was obvious that if we
want to really make an impact upfront, and that we don't spend a decade trying
to get in, this was the way to go. And ultimately, I like to partner, that's
where you create more value. If you don't partner, you will always spend much more
money, spend much more time to build everything in house. And then you're
like, you know, that a hoarder that keeps everything in your house, and you
don't let anybody come in, and we don't believe in it. We have an open-door
policy, we like to partner, we want our system to be used by as many people
as possible. And if you can make it faster by partnering, why not? We'd
rather participate in a very, very big business with a small percentage than
owning a niche that nobody buys into. Okay, so some companies are more like
that private closed door, where they like to keep everything internal and develop
the in-house. So with these partnerships, what opportunities do you see in the
future? And why should more people look to do the partnership route?
Well, I think I'll start with your last question. I think it's for a small
company, for a company that is in a scale-up phase like us, there's not
really a choice. Either you really have, you specialize in a field, and you
basically limit your capabilities to one indication, one field, you raise a bunch
of money, you burn all that money into building a product, into using brute
force to make your product penetrate a little bit, and that's it. And then you
try to sell the company, or you try to build a sustainable business. And I
believe that, you know, if you look to it throughout history, all businesses in
capitalism end up consolidating somehow. The medtech market, and the spine, or
radiology, or whatever, they are no different. They will, the same thing will
happen. And specialization will, of course, limit the amount of things you
can do, but also increases, gives you an upside that is immense, because you are,
you become a specialist on something. We are specialists in robotics, that's what
we do. And therefore, we believe that all companies should be open to do such
things, because this will allow them not only to get access to new fields they
wouldn't explore otherwise, it will give them the possibility of, you know, even
a minimizing risk. Because if you have many horses on the race, with different
ways, you are exposed differently in the market. You can then go to a very risky
market, like the international radiology and oncology market, because, well, it's
not that rich of a market compared to orthopedics and spine. But you can also
go to an orthopedics and spine market with a good partner, that gives you good
business, and that allows you to differentiate. And I think we owe it to
our shareholders, and ultimately, we also owe it to the patients. If we have good
technology that we think that can help them, why shouldn't we do it? Right? And
that's why we decided to do this. Ultimately, we see ourselves as a
robotics company that we have a platform, and you cannot say you have a platform
if it's not being used. And therefore, there are limited resources, limited
time, limited people. So why don't we really partner? And that's how I will
look at it. I think robotic companies are starting to realize that because you see
more and more this kind of cross pollination between fields and between
companies. And I do expect that we'll see more of these in the future. And
ultimately, the big corporate companies will want the technology and the
technologies to be available. And the more differentiated you are, the better
you are positioned for the future. Because ultimately, if you are in seven
or eight different fields, and these fields overlap with a strategic, it makes
you a much better target for a potential exit or acquisition or close
partnership, whatever it is. So it's about creating really good
opportunities to put technology out, to offer technology to patients, but also
to position your company for the future that's ahead.
Okay, so what do you think is the biggest growth area for the business?
What indication do you think has the most market potential?
Well, the two markets we are in, we see great potential on it. The radiology and
oncology market are... the case volume is immense. Usually technology goes where
the biggest challenges are. And in percutaneous procedures in radiology and
oncology, you are dealing with small lesions, sometimes hardly visible,
sometimes movable, in deep tissues close to critical structures. So the
technology will grow there. And you see that we have currently five players in
the market with some more incoming, with different technologies, large robots,
small robots, patient mounted robots, electromagnetic navigation, optical
navigation, all these exist. And this is a high growth market. And we were happy
to be positioned there. Then I would say that anything that is a percutaneous
treatment on the surgical space is a good growth area. We moved to the kidney
stone management area because we see that there have been basically no big
groundbreaking innovation in the last 40 years. And it continues to be very hard
to do a puncture in the kidney accurately. And we believe that with our
system, we can offer a validated, very easy to use and accurate solution to this
targeting. We see that this is kind of validated as well by the fact that J&J
has moved to this market and deployed the Monarch system for it. And I would
say that there are other fields that are very interesting. And people, if you
look at robotics, you see where things are going, you know, the ENT side, some
robotics are appearing there for ear surgery. You see that orthopedics,
orthopedics companies are looking throughout other procedures other than
big joints, because, you know, these customers are used to use robotics, but
they use it only for joint replacement procedures. We look at prostate care,
BPH, benign prostate hyperplasia. This is something that has a big traction. So
ultimately, anything that can be done percutaneously is big. I do see that all
areas will have robotics eventually. I don't think we can get out of it. I think
in 20 years, we'll be looking at somebody and saying, is this guy not
using a robot? But I also think we need to understand that robotics are not a
silver bullet for solving all problems. They have a tool, we have a
specific set of tools, we solve certain problems, but we need to be part of a
certain market. So ultimately, robotics adoption will not be driven by robotics
alone. It depends on instrumentation, it depends on the amount of clinical data
you can gather, it depends on even the business dynamics. You know, robotics are
big in some areas because ASCs appeared. So anything that is done in an
outpatient setting, in ASCs, this is a good target for robotics because it's
all about efficiency, better care experience, better outcomes that the
patients don't stay overnight. So if you are, you know, anybody that is starting a
company and working in this space, the ASC market is where we want to be.
Okay. And so let's move on from the technology and the patient, let's move
on to like the business side of things. So how's the business historically been
funded up to this point?
So we've had for a long time, our family and friends rounds pre-series A private
placements. So the company was run private until 2019 or 2020. We had our
series A in 2020 when we had our first institutional investor coming in. And we
are now doing a fundraiser series B. And of course here, we believe that we'll
have more venture capital coming in. In the past, we've been funded by, you know,
selling the license sales and the R&D investments through partners, European
funding, and all the typical thing any robotic company would do, I would say.
Okay. And so this series B then, so what's this money going to help with?
What's the next stage for the company?
We will, we'll take the money and basically divide it in two main routes.
The first route would be to accelerate commercialization of the Micromate
platform for radiology. So our goal is to increase our marketing and sales reach
and be able to basically initiate commercialization efforts globally. Not
only in the US as the main market, Europe as the second prior market, but also
outside these main markets, because it's part of something we really want to do.
And of course, we need to continue developing the technology. And another
part of the proceeds are going to be used to ramp up our kidney stone management
business through the establishment of greater, bigger operations at Lark Robotics,
being able to have our own clinical team and sales team for it. Our goal is to be
able to kind of morph the company into a structure where interventional systems is
the operations and R&D brain and heart of the operations, but then be able to
establish different commercial arms that are specialized in the fields we want to
support. So ultimately it's going to be on these three main areas, operational
excellence, R&D excellence and commercial excellence.
Okay. So these spin-offs then, so how's that going to work? Are they going to be
kind of standalone companies that have their own identity and culture and
Micromet are producing the interventional systems, even are producing the research
and development and the technological capabilities, or is it going to kind of be
one business, but under two umbrellas?
It will depend. So this can be independent business units and independent companies,
or they can just be in internal departments at interventional systems. It
depends on the business maturity. It depends on how you position yourself. I
give an example. It may not have nothing to do with business or the product itself,
but if we try to sell to a urologist for a kidney stone treatment, there is somehow
some politics between radiologists and urologists about who owns the patient, who
does the access, urologists want to become more independent. And I think you
understand if we position ourselves as an interventional radiology company, trying
to sell to urologists to do a kidney access, you start immediately in the wrong
foot, because they'll think you do it like a radiologist to do it, and they have
other needs when they are doing the target as a urologist. So in some areas, we
really want to make sure that this is an independent business unit with its own
culture, with individuals that are experts in the area that are recognized by the
customer, so that we can have this brand established. In some other markets,
especially the ones that are emerging, there is maybe not big interest on
spinning off too early, because this company will be in the market for a long
time, and the adoption will not be as big. So for us, maybe in that case, it's
more interesting to continue running a specific department or team inside
interventional systems. So we are very flexible on the structure, and we are
lucky that our investors and shareholders really have, are very open-minded in
concept. But the way I look at it in the end is, a surgical platform company needs
to have different ways of making the technology available to the different
markets. If it's an independent company and an independent department, or just a
pure distribution with a partner or strategic, these are different models we
are open to explore.
Okay. So historically then, what have been some of the biggest challenges that
have faced the company?
Well, money is always something that all startup companies need to deal with. You
have always a limited runaway, and you need to be very mindful of the
investments you do. You need to be very careful on how you manage this. I think
the biggest challenge for any robotics company that starts from an R&D side, and
not from a pure commercialization side with an existing technology, for example,
with an existing technology, for example, like we did with Fish Robotics or
Accelos, the robot was there. So it was all about commercialization, right? For
us, the challenge was, how do we really don't show that we love this technology
too much, right? We need to be very clinical. We need to be very scientific.
We need to avoid all this typical marketing talk and so on. You know, we as
a company really made a big effort to avoid being too technical and too
engineering, if this word exists, talking with customers. For us, we needed to do a
big effort on understanding the clinical challenges. Some of them are really much
simpler than what we thought initially, and we had overkill engineering solutions
for it. So for us, it was about finding the right level of complexity and
technological features we put in the product to keep it simple, at the same
time as we keep it valuable. So this was a big learning for us, and we needed to
handle, of course, it's very hard to find talents and we cannot pay as the tech
companies, you know, the software companies, Google's, Amazon's that have
offices everywhere. The funding level for our companies is also not the same. The
return on investment for investors is not the same. So you don't get the same
type of investment in an internet company or a pure software development
company in the consumer business you'll get, which means that talent is somehow
scarce. So we needed also to figure out a way of having a kind of spread out
company throughout Europe, throughout different offices to be able to get good
people, get good talent around, because ultimately, it's very hard to find in a
certain place the right, there is no kind of Silicon Valley in Europe, you know,
where you get everybody and you just go into a coffee shop and you find the next
brightest guy that's going to solve your problem. Here it's a human resource and
recruiting is a big, a big challenge. It's something that we that we always
need to be pay a lot of attention because your team makes your company
ultimately.
Yeah, definitely. And so right now, what are the biggest challenges facing the
company?
So at this stage, the challenges are all about, you know, continuing to do big
R&D efforts at the same time as we are starting our commercialization efforts.
Sales cycles are long, which means that, you know, you have a product in the
market, but doesn't mean that your revenue picks up at the same time as you
are spending in R&D, especially the more specialized you get, the more expensive
things are. So of course, you know, it's always again, like I mentioned from the
past, you need to balance and manage your resources appropriately. I think
in terms of challenges, I don't think we really face big challenges here, except
the fact that we want to do a lot of things. And we have a limited amount of
people in the company. So it's always, okay, what do we prioritize? How do we
push? How many people do we send to support a certain case? It's more how we
organize our day and organize our operations and priorities for maximum
efficiency. So as a company, we've had, it's always important to be very
mindful in how you build your commercial team. And I think that's
something that we try to be very careful with, not because it's expensive.
Growing commercially brings exponentially increasing costs and
demands to other company departments. If you have a sales team, your marketing
team needs to be supported. You need to have a very clear roadmap. You need to
have your engineers up and running and your service team ready, because once
you put yourself out there, you need to fulfill your level of service. So the
challenges here is really finding the right people for the right stage of the
company. But this is normal. I don't see it as a problem. I see it as a welcome
challenge we have ahead because it shows that we are mature, that we are in a
level where we can think about these things now.
Okay. So are you seeing any signs of the economic headwinds? There's a lot of
negativity in the market at the minute with a little bit of positivity from
certain areas, but are you seeing the signs yourself at the moment?
Yeah, I think everybody sees it. Ultimately, you know, the most important
thing for us is also to ensure that everybody, and here I'm not even talking
about the business, I'm talking about the people and we'll sellers who are
responsible for, we really see that we need to be also socially responsible to
our team and make sure that they go through this phase in an appropriate
fashion. So we try to make sure that we don't affect them or that the team is
not affected by, you know, increasing costs related to energy or to equipment
and materials. We want to make sure everybody has everything they need to
work with and that we keep paying good quality salaries to keep good quality
people with us. This is the first thing. And you see it because it's around you.
You see it in our family, in your colleagues. It's normal. In terms of the
end customers, I believe that we are very well positioned here with our price
point because we don't really see a pushback in terms of pricing and price
per procedure and subscriptions. I think we found a good sweet spot that still
allows hospitals to see this as a good investment. So commercially, we are
seeing zero backlash based on the economic headwinds. On the investment
side, I believe this is something that everybody that is fundraising at the
moment sees and feels that funds are also trying to fund themselves. So the
timelines need to align very well. And of course, you know, when the discussions
enter, you know, valuation or the amount of funding and for what you are going to
use things, these are things that you need to pay extra attention to because
it needs to be done in an appropriate way. So we do see that funds
are more careful and want to really bet on the right horses. And when it comes
to people, it's about keeping a good balance between what we are doing. And
luckily, commercially, we are seeing no backlash at all, which is good for us.
Yeah, very good indeed. And were you affected by the Silicon Valley bank
collapse that's happened this past week? Well, except many, many emails, people
asking if we were affected. All was easy. We did not have any relationship
with the SVB. So we're basically untouched with the situation.
Okay, fair enough. Unless the market really suffers with it, then I think
everybody will get the impact. Yeah, definitely. So yeah, what
about the future? So paint me a picture of what interventional systems
will look like in the next five to 10 years. Well, in the next five to 10 years,
we will be a company that is going to be providing robots for a multitude of
procedures that the big robots cannot support. I think there are some
indications where robotics have penetrated immensely. We're talking about
total joints, the intuitive type robots, which we do not compete with, so that's
not our scope. But we believe that the system is going to be used by a multitude
of strategics and partners that are able to use their instrumentation,
their implants to treat patients better. We see ourselves in the future as being
able to participate in all these businesses as robot suppliers. And we do
have a special love for a couple of these markets, like the interventional
radiology and oncology, the kidney stone, and we do hope that we continue
running them in a good and profitable business. It's funny because usually
as a CEO, people would ask, okay, what's your next step? Do you want
to grow the company public? Do you want to be a unicorn and so on?
Honestly, it's not our DNA. It's about being a sustainable business. So we don't
want to be too big and neither too small. We want to make sure we have the right
size. So above everything, I would like that we really are able to offer
cost-effective solutions, affordable technology to the customers, and that
they are using as many procedures as possible, either direct or through
partners, and have a sustainable and profitable business that is able to
give the return on investment to the shareholders, give good conditions of
work and growth opportunities and self-development opportunities for the
team and our individuals, and ultimately being able to continue bringing
innovation. So I want to make sure that we never become a pure commercial
company that forgets what innovation is about, because then it will be losing our
culture and our soul and we don't want that. Okay, so I'd like to ask a question
about people who are maybe listening to the podcast who want to enter into
surgical robotics or even low-cost robotics as your platform is more at
that end. What advice would you give to people looking to enter the
market, whether that be from general med tech or academia like yourself? I think
it's having our backgrounds and our toolkit as an engineer or as a
salesperson or whoever, very well-defined, so the foundations and the basics need
to be there. It's important to understand, you know, the clinical challenges that we
want to enter with, entering the technical specialties are very important, because
we need to be able to apply basic, or let's say standard, not basic, standard
engineering to clinical problems. Ultimately, the first thing you learn
when you study biomedical engineering, at least here in Portugal, is you get your
biophysics degree and you learn, you know, our body is all about physics and
physics is the foundation of engineering. So having our foundations set and right
is important, because ultimately this business is built by biomedical
engineers or converted electrical, mechanical and software engineers that
work in this field. So we need to be able to talk shop, you know, we need to be
able to talk technical challenges and how do we solve them. But then, on the
other hand, it's very important to understand the clinical difficulties,
understand what robotics are, how were they built, you know, reading about
the business models and how the companies do things is very important,
because ultimately nobody's going to be successful if they don't understand the
market dynamics. It's not about what you can build. You cannot pick up your
research project and make it a product, because there's a lot of things about,
you know, what are the objectives of the strategics, what are the current
publications the key doctors in this field are doing, what are people looking
at, what are the reimbursement environments, where are you located as a
company, all these count in the end. And I think everybody needs to look at
these different dimensions and look at it. But ultimately, I think it's about
being able to really, really, really have a solid foundation and a solid
understanding of the problem you want to solve. We were lucky to have the
chance to contribute in a field where we can spread throughout different areas
and that most of the issues we solve with robotics are about accuracy,
geometrical stuff, navigation, because this is very technical. But if you are
looking to enter a kind of more therapeutic company, you need to
specialize, you need to understand what you are doing. So the clinical and
engineering foundations are important and you need to understand
exactly what the market dynamics are. Otherwise, you have the risk to have a
very good engineering solution for a non-existing problem. And this is
definitely something that won't work. Okay, so because your background is quite
engineering focused, tell me about some of the foundational skill sets that
engineers should be looking to take, some classes in school, what skill sets
should they be learning in order to try and get into the industry?
Look, everything. I tell you, ultimately, I never imagined. So in our
engineering school, we don't have a lot of background in economics or
philosophy and something, but it's something that helps me out today. And
I try to push the foundation separately while I work, try to have my own
continuous education. I think everything is important if you are from the
engineering side and you want to be an engineer in a company. Biophysics is
very important. It's very important to understand things related to the
electromechanical aspects of robots and motors. So anything that has to do with
the basic things like, again, for robotics, drive chains, controllers and
other things are important. Software plays a very big role currently in
robotics because with artificial intelligence, augmented reality,
machine learning things, statistics plays a big role. So I think we need to
look at really the basic things you need as an engineer. We're talking about
fundamentals, again, statistics. I think everybody should have a chance if they
want to do self-development, to study a little bit of management and economics,
to think about, you know, how things are sold, perception of value, things like
that. And ultimately, I think everybody should study philosophy in some way, one
way or another, because it helps you think. It helps you. It's not about who
or what Aristotle or Plato said. It's about how you think, how you solve a
problem, how you look to something in a different way with the tool sets you
have. And if you look at the engineering, it's the same thing. Your premises are
not logical statements, but are your tools that you have and things kind of
fall into place. Same way we look at it and we say, small logic problem. You
target more accurately if you can see what you are doing. You have robots that
fit inside the gantry and gives you live imaging. How can you target
accurately with that specific robot? Because you can see what you do with
that robot. That's how we solve this problem. It's like we try not to bring a
very academic way to solve it. This is most of the problems we face have been
solved technically somehow. So the philosophical question is, how can I use
my resources around me to build something good? It's a question we ask
us every day.
Brilliant. So one side of the coin is obviously the skill set side. That's
only half of the battle. So what kind of behaviors do you look for when you're
building your team out?
We like people that challenge the status quo. Not that we like anarchy,
because in anarchy you cannot work. But I've been in this company time
enough to see that the culture also builds itself. And what we've seen is
that whoever in the company grew in leadership were people that challenged
the status quo. What if every day asking, what if I do this? What if I do
that? What if we look at this in this way? I think with us, and I think with
any innovation company, the pace is very, very fast. Sometimes you need to
do and say sorry afterwards. And sometimes you need to prioritize. It's
like, look, you need to keep the patient and the safety of the product as a
first priority. And this is what should drive decisions. Even if it's
uncomfortable, sometimes for a colleague or for even ourselves to do
something, we also need to make such decisions. So I think it can only work
with fast thinkers, people that are able to take risks, controlled risks. So
it's not like you take a careless decision for the company, but you need
to be able to decide fast, to decide sometimes with a very limited number of
data points and limited information. And that's what we look for in terms of
working. People that think fast, that think different, that are able to
challenge the status quo and people that don't put a lot of ego in their work.
Because ultimately, you will not always be right. And this is how it should be.
We should work together, not for what we believe in, or what we think is the
right solution. We should work for our beliefs, of course. But ultimately, it
should be based on facts and based on what is the best solution for the
business, for the patient, for our investors, for the community. This is
what should be driven. So fast decision, being able really to think outside the
box, this is what we look at. Okay, brilliant stuff. And to close off the
podcast for today, I've got a question I like to ask at the end of every
episode. In your eyes and your vision, paint me a picture, what do you see as
the future of surgical robotics? I would see surgical... That's a tough
question, because I don't know. I cannot really look into the crystal ball,
but I see that there are some trends that are here to stay. Miniaturization
is one of them, having a small system that is portable, flexibility and
versatility. So surgical platforms will win the market, I believe, because they
will benefit from the cross-pollination of fields and they will take the best
out of everything and be used in a standardized way. Robotics are a
system to execute tasks, so there is a finite amount of tasks you can do on a
certain type of procedure. So robotics will allow the standardization. I will
believe that they will even autonomously do some part of the procedures, but I
don't believe they will replace physicians. So I think there's gonna be a
task sharing. Anything that is basically geometrical, technical, etc., is gonna
be controlled by robots. The rest will be controlled by the physician on the
bedside. I believe the physician will never be remote from the patient, because
it's where they belong, next to the patient, to treat them. I believe that
things like augmented reality, machine learning, digital twinning will be very
important. I think it's gonna be way easier to see, to have access to
information in real time, based on information we are reading, because
robots are sensors as well. Anything that you can use to control, you can also
use to sense and measure. So I believe that robotics will be part of the
whole ecosystem. They will be something that will allow you to execute some
tasks, sometimes autonomously. In some ways, I believe they will be sensors that
will inform you, and I think they will be trained and work to react to things
that we'll measure, see, or have planned before. And therefore, I see them as a
very high-skilled physician assistant that's gonna be in the room, to do
exactly what the physician wants them to do, when standing next to it. So that's
how I look at it in 10 years. If we talk in 20-30 years, I believe that some
things won't require a physician there, maybe. And ultimately, in 50-100 years,
you didn't ask, but I think robotics will cease to exist, because I believe we'll
be so good at prevention, and robots will be different. Will be tiny things that
go inside your body and fix it for you, or you will even do complete organ
replacement. So as with anything in life, robotics exist, they will have their
peak, but I also think they will eventually fade away, because something
greater appeared, and which is good. It's what we always strive for as humanity.
Fantastic. Well, what an answer to finish on. So thank you very much for being a guest,
Pedro. It's been a pleasure.
Been a pleasure. Thank you.
