Hello, and welcome to this episode of the Surgibots podcast. In this episode, we sit
down with Lucien Blondel, co-founder and CTO of Quantum Surgical. Quantum are a really
cool little company defining a new area of robotics in the interventional oncology market.
In the episode, we talk about everything from building a brand, starting a company, current
market challenges, and everything in between. So, enjoy the episode.
Hello, Lucien, and welcome to the Surgibots podcast. It's a pleasure to host you here.
Thank you for having me in.
No problem. You're pretty famous on LinkedIn in this space, but for those of you who don't
know, who are you?
Wow, that's a big question. I'm an engineer by background. Currently, I'm a co-founder
and CTO of Quantum Surgical, a startup in robotics for interventional oncology. And
I've been working in robotics and imaging for over 20 years. So, I started in the early
2000s. I worked on introducing robotics for various specialties. Actually, I started in
laparoscopy, then orthopedics, neurosurgery, cranial neurosurgery, spine surgery, then
I moved to interventional radiology and now interventional oncology. So, I work both in
the startup environment and big corporates, Zimmer Biomet and GE Healthcare.
Cool. So, how did you get into the space?
Well, it's since the very beginning, actually. So, I was in engineering school. I was not
very much attracted to heavy industries, such as automotive or railway or any kind of heavy
industry that requires automation. And so, I picked an internship that was a nine-month
internship in a research lab that was developing a surgical robot for laparoscopy. At the time,
it was aiming to compete with the computer motion system and intuitive surgical DaVinci.
It was a very big research project and that's where I discovered pretty much the medical
field and surgical robotics field. It was the very beginnings of this field. So, I researched
all what was happening in this field and worked on this project. And then I took a gap year,
traveled the world with my twin brother and sister. And then when I came back,
I applied for a position in a startup that was called MedTech and that was
in the south of France. And that's where we started our journey in surgical robotics.
Brilliant. So, what attracted you to the medical space and surgical robots?
Yeah, I think it's the purpose. I mean, it's the meaning of what you do. What's the benefit? Who
do you provide benefit to? So, for me, it was a strong passion for designing products that can
improve people's lives through technology. I was not much attracted to improving the speed of a
vehicle or the less, I don't know, money to spend on some technology. So, I think it's what
is the same common purpose for all people in the MedTech industry, that is to contribute to some
way. And whatever department you're working on, it can be product development, but it can be a
regulatory, it can be HR, finance. We are all contributing to putting devices on the market
and we hope to have physicians using those devices to help people live a better life or
have a better quality of life. Cool. So, talk me through that
MedTech essay story then. So, start, you applied for an engineering position. Talk me through what
happened for you. Yeah. So, when we started, we were just four people in the startup and we
started developing a robot in orthopedics. So, the robot name was called Bridget. And we designed,
first it was a teleoperative device that was milling the bone for preparing the implant
position in the femur and on the tibia. And then we switched to what we call a collaborative
robotics approach where the robot is more of an assistant that helps do the cuts at the proper
position and the proper angle based on a pre-surgical plan that is done on the software.
That's where we started the MedTech essay journey. And in 2000, that's quite a long ago, 2005,
Zimmer at the time was looking at some kind of new emerging technologies. They got interested.
We started discussing, do kind of a labs and they acquired the technology in 2006.
And they decided to take over the technology and take the project on their own.
And for some other reasons, the project didn't go until the market. So, we started again
with the same people and we chose neurosurgery because cranial neurosurgery is a field where
there is already a lot of pre-surgical planning, navigation technologies. And so, it was a kind of
a sweet spot to introduce robotics, especially when it comes to what we call functional neurosurgery,
when you have to implant electrode deep into the brain. And the robotics is especially suited for
this kind of operation when you have to implant 10, 15 electrode deep into the brain. And that
is kind of a tricky procedure to do freehand actually. So, the robotics can help you do that
much faster and with a very reproducible way. So, that's where we actually started
commercializing the robot. And we expanded then with a new program to the spine surgery application
that was in early 2010, so 2013, 14. And then Zimmer that in the meantime had both acquired
Biomed, so that was the Zimmer Biomed group, came back and was looking for a technology to
add robotics to their actual portfolio of hip and knees, mostly business. And they acquired
the company in 2016. So, that's a bit of, I mean, shortly the bit of my journey at MedTechSA.
In 2009, I just left the company. I took a gap year travel around Asia and I worked a couple
of years also at the GDL scale in international imaging systems to bring robotics to the hybrid
operating room. Okay, cool. So, after the Zimmer acquisition, Zimmer Biomed acquisition, that
brings us to Quantum Surgical. So, tell me, what is Quantum Surgical? Yeah, so Quantum Surgical,
we are obviously a French startup based in Montpellier, South of France, great weather,
great quality of life. And we target the international oncology market. So,
international oncology is the fourth pillar of modern cancer care. So, there is obviously drugs,
medicine, there is surgery, but not all patients are eligible to surgery. And there is radiotherapy,
but not all organs are suitable for radiotherapy. So, international oncology is
minimally invasive by definition field that enables through the vessels or through percutaneous access
to basically biopsy or destroy a tumor. And that's where we wanted to introduce robotics. So,
we have been founded in 2017. And now we grew to over 100 employees with a subsidiary in the US
and a joint venture in China. And we market the Epion robotic device that helps physician
perform percutaneous ablation with the pre-surgical planning software,
navigated robotics and ablation confirmation. So, that's really the range of what we do. And
currently, the product is CE-marked and FTA cleared. We have a couple of systems in France.
We also announced recently the first installation in the US in Baptist, South Florida, in Miami.
And we are starting the clinical adoption of the product in both Europe and the US.
Great. So, what challenge is this company there to solve? What challenges are you
solving through the Epion system? Actually, many challenges because
right now this is 99% of the time, this is done freehand. And this is quite complex
to place a needle into less than two centimeter tumor into the abdomen where everything is
mobile and deformable and moves with the patient, moves with the breathing. And you have to place
the needle precisely because you want to destroy the tumor through either heat or cold. And you
have to get five millimeter or 10 millimeter margin around the tumor to avoid local tumor
recurrence. So, it's quite complex. It's what we call image guided. So, they look at images
from the CT scan. So, it's in a CT internal shuttle suit. But the gesture in itself, it's
fully manual. So, it's freehand. And some tumors are very difficult to reach. And when you have
to place several needles, it's even more complex because you have to place the needles in a certain
geometrical configuration with parallelism and spacing that have to be respected. And that's
very challenging. So, basically when you do this, there are four challenges. The one is you need to
see the tumor in the images. Sometimes you don't see the tumor very well. So, we bring image fusion
software so you can combine CT, MR, and you will be able to see the tumor by merging those two
modalities. The second is you need to anticipate how much of the tumor you will burn. And that's
right now in the mental space of the physician. So, what we do is we simulate the ablation zone
on the images so he can check if he will get the adequate margins. Then, obviously, you have to
place the needle at the right position and angulation. That's where all the technologies
to locate the patient, monitor the patient's respiration, and robotic guidance play a critical
role. And then the last part, once you have the needle in place, you perform your ablation
and you need to review the images to verify how much you actually destroyed the tumor and did you
get the 5 millimeter or 10 millimeter margin. And this is very difficult to see in the
image and to quantify when you just have your eyes. And what we do is with image fusion, image
processing algorithm, we quantify this information to confirm whether or not the tumor has been fully
covered and the 5 or 10 millimeter margin has been done. So, how is this better for the patient?
How is it better for the surgeon? And how is it better for the health system?
You know, it's actually the percutaneous ablation is a great technique because it's
minimally invasive, it can be done on an outpatient basis sometimes, and it has a curative
intent for a very early stage and early stage cancer patient. So, the technique in itself is
great when it's done properly, but the challenge is it requires quite a learning curve
and quite some equipment. So, you know, the benefit, what we aim, what our purpose is
is to standardize this technique that has been clinically proven. And for some indication,
it's as effective as a surgery. So, it can be a first-line treatment, but not that many people
are capable of doing that technique with the skills that is required. So, what we want to do
is to standardize this technique and bring robotics to enable more physicians
to provide this kind of program and so treat more patients with this kind of technology.
What we've seen, what we've researched is that there are approximately, let's say,
for liver 3 million people, for the full abdomen 4 million people that have early stage cancer
that are eligible to percutaneous ablation, but only roughly 20% of them benefit from this
technique. So, what we want to do is to increase this percentage to enable more patients benefit
from this great technique. And we believe that through advanced planning software,
robotics and confirmation, we can increase this percentage.
Okay, great stuff. So, what's the vision for this business then? So,
what's the vision for Quantum? Where is it going to go in the future?
Actually, we started, so right now we are in the very beginning of the commercial phase. We were
in what we call a limited customer release. We know by experience that it takes time to introduce
robotics. This is not neurosurgery, this is not orthopedics, this is not laparoscopic surgery,
where robotics has been introduced one or two decades ago. This is just the beginning of
robotics. This is just the beginning of pre-planning and navigation. So, it will take
time to educate the market, to educate the community to use those technologies.
So, we take a step-by-step approach. We started with the liver.
So, we targeted the liver ablation indication, then we expanded to the full abdomen,
which is basically liver, kidney and other organs. We are actually in an ongoing trial
on the lung performed at Gustave-Roussy Cancer Center in France. So, we will soon
be able to expand the capability of the Epion robot to lung ablation as well.
And the next step will be to also design the product so that it can help international
radiologists perform percutaneous bone ablation. So, there is a huge number of metastases that
appear in the bones, mostly pelvis and spine. And there is a really a fast-growing number of
ablation procedures that are performed to improve the quality of life of patients that have
these pathologies. So, the goal for us is really to leverage the technology that we've designed
for liver to all the other organs that are targeted by this percutaneous ablation technique.
So, what's the feedback been when you're implementing this technology? What's the
surging community thinking of this? We've got actually excellent feedback
from the first customer in the US. That's a key market for us because it's the main
market for medical devices and that's where people are looking at how much the technology is,
how fast is the technology adopted. The feedback is it helps me do a complex procedure. It makes
complex procedure easy. So, especially when you do procedures with multiple needles. So,
there are some what we call ablation modalities like irreversible electroporation where you have
to place two, three, four, five, six needles into the tumor and they have to remain parallel and
they have to be spaced 15 to 20 millimeters. This is extremely difficult to do freehand and
for a robot this is quite easy because it's just a geometrical command that is sent to the
robot to position one needle and the other relative to the coordinate system. So, that's where
basically everything that is difficult to do freehand can be made much easier with the robot.
When you have to do very angulated steep double oblique trajectories that is difficult to do
freehand. When you have to place several needles that is difficult to do freehand. And when you
want to really assess how much you have covered the tumor and avoid local recurrence that is
difficult to assess in the images. So, that's where software also helps you do that much more
efficiently. So, benefits have been evolving because we are starting to show clinical evidence,
clinical usage of the product. So, since we are introducing robotics, the first question is how
real is this? How does it work? How much it impacts my workflow? And now we are seeing much
more people digging into how it can help and impact their clinical practice.
Great. So, what do you think are going to be some of the biggest objections
and biggest barriers to implementing the EPIO?
It's always the same in robotics. Some people are good at what they do and it's a challenge
for them to switch from manual expertise to robotics. Because, yes, it requires to learn
the technology and to change a little bit the workflow and to train the team to set up the system
and to prepare the patient according to the technology. So, introducing a new technology
into the operating room or international suite and into the workflow, it always requires some
effort. So, this is where we need early adopters. We need innovators that are convinced by the
benefit of robotics and that will go through this step to show the clinical benefits for
the patients and for their practice of this kind of robotic technology. Then, you know,
it's always the same. It's the price, it's the cost, it's the size, it's all these things that
are visible from a surgical robot and that can counterbalance the benefit on the clinical side.
So, what stage is the business at right now? What are the next milestones for Quantum Surgical and
what are you working towards at the moment?
So, as I said, we are in a limited customer release. So, we target selected reference
centers in Europe and in the US to help us refine the technology and build clinical evidence.
So, the next milestone will be a wider launch of the product in those two markets. We are also
working on getting approval in China through the NMPA process and then we will expand to
other countries, other regions. But right now, the main focus is building the commercial teams,
getting systems installed and getting clinical adoption of the technology so that we can
build and show the clinical evidence for this technology.
And historically, what have been some of the biggest challenges that you've had to overcome
and how did you get over them?
It's a road full of challenges. Well, I think, you know, to start with, the challenge is money
and people. When you start a company, when we started the company in 2017, we had just the idea
of building a surgical robotics company. So, you need to find the ID, you need to find the market
and then you need to find money and people to develop the product. So, those are the two,
I would say, first challenges. Then all the challenges that automatic companies are facing
that are around product development, technology development, iteration of different technologies
to find the right one, really understanding what's the unmet need and how you build this
technology to answer this need. You know that the regulatory pathways are more and more difficult,
they're more and more demanding. There is a lot of scrutiny of the FDA on clinical studies,
on usability studies, on cyber security. So, those are areas you need to invest more than
now than in the past. And yeah, I mean, there is all these challenges that
are required to overcome to bring a surgical robot to the market. And for us,
the challenge on this specific journey that is quantum surgical is to adapting what we know from
more, I would say, hard tissue robots to soft tissue, which obviously we cannot be as invasive
as we are in neurosurgery, spine surgery or orthopedics. So, we need to monitor the patient
respiration but be non-invasive when it's all moving and deformable. So, that's not the same
challenges. So, take me back to the start. I want to understand the early days of quantum when you
get the co-founders together and you're trying to define the product. Talk me through how you
actually bring all those pieces together and start working towards building a robot.
Yeah, well, you know, actually, so we started the company with Bertin Naoum, who is the CEO.
Right now, Fernand Badenoff, who is the general manager, and Sophie Roca, who is the
assistant exec of Bertin. So, we've been working together for 15 to 20 years in those several
specialties. And so, we know each other quite well. We are kind of a complementary team in terms of
skill sets and mindset. And so, we had agreed on the idea of building a company. And then we took
months really to scout the market, look at all the indication in the surgical and
international space, and try to find the right equation where robotics would actually bring value
to a surgical or international technique. So, the idea was not to build another robot in neurosurgery
or spine surgery or orthopedics, but to find another area where there is a proven curative
technique that is done freehand and that is quite difficult to perform. So, only, you know,
not that many centers are capable of providing this technique. But when it's done properly,
it has very good results and it really improves the patient outcome. So, it took us some time,
but we found this in liver cancer. And then, you know, you start discussing with physicians. So,
we discussed with a lot of physicians in this space and they all share the same challenges
they have. And now that robotics is quite introduced in several specialties, they all
envision that there is a need, there is a potential benefit of robotics in that space.
So, that took us maybe six months to find this market segment, I would say.
So, how many market segments were you really looking at at the time?
Well, I've been looking at all the market segments. I cannot say, yeah, I mean, I've been
following the surgical robotics industry for 20 years. So, I've been looking at pretty much
everything. Maybe not, you know, we haven't looked in detail into ophthalmology or dental
surgery. We've kept into a more traditional surgical and interventional space. But
we've looked at everything. And we've also looked at what, who, where were the main players,
were there any robotics already introduced on the market? How was the system positioned
on the market? So, we tried also to find a space where there were a room for a newcomer,
but also not an empty space where, you know, nobody has ever tried to bring robotics.
So, I want to bring the conversation to your personal branding journey. As I said at the start,
you're a bit of an influencer in surgical robotics, but why did you start building a
brand? And why did you start sharing your knowledge with the community?
Yeah, I mean, that's a good question. I think that's something I've been doing
since the beginning. It's just, I just scaled it to another dimension through internet and
social media. Basically, I think I really, I started on LinkedIn maybe in 2011, but I never
had any plan. It was more, you know, when this all started, you put your experience, your background,
and then you post something once in a while and you connect to people and that was it. But
I think it was during the COVID maybe to 2021. I figured that there was, and we were in pre,
we were in a pre-market situation. So, I figured a couple of things and one was we,
I could share what I already shared internally to more people so that it could benefit to the
whole community and help, you know, surgical robotics technology as a whole to go faster or
be better or be more relevant to products that will actually bring benefits for the patients
and also get awareness on what we were going to commercialize in the coming years and also
bringing awareness outside of the US, I would say, to early stage startups that,
you know, sometimes lack of awareness in this field. And I know there are a lot of people,
a lot of teams doing great things and putting a lot of effort into building those medtech and
surgical robot products and they deserve some awareness.
Great. And has it created any opportunities for you at all?
Yeah. I mean, that's the side effect of sharing is that there is a lot of
people coming back to you, asking for questions, sometimes asking for advices or just
bringing opportunities. So, I think everybody's, you know, saying that is that when you network
properly, then you are in a position where opportunities comes to you and you don't have
much more to go find the opportunity. So, it's more you have to select what opportunities you
want to pursue rather than the rest. So, yes, of course, I've been contacted by many people,
got a lot of opportunities, but I remain focused on building the quantum surgical startup.
Yeah. So, should more people be doing it in this space, do you think?
Yeah. I think, you know, it's, on the other hand, it, you know, it's not easy. It's not easy.
It requires some exposure and some effort because you need to bring, basically, bring value
to the community. And so, to bring value, it's not something that you just do in five minutes.
So, you have to be thoughtful of what you do. You have to have some kind of north star that
drives your content creation strategy to be consistent and to be relevant. And so, there is
an investment. There is an investment to be done, but obviously, the investment is paying off. So,
anybody, I would recommend to anybody to at least do some level of sharing and networking
because we see that, especially since the COVID situation, we've changed from,
you know, it's a more global world. So, opportunities, you can do, you can work
remote for companies in the US or in China or in other countries in Europe. But these people,
they need to know who you are, what you do, where is your value, and that will come if you share
and connect. So, what advice would you give to anyone who wants to start doing this and
building their following and building their brand? Yeah, just start. I mean, yeah, I think it's,
do not overcomplicate things. I think you can build a long time. Your strategy, you can think,
you can change, you can iterate, you can adapt. What you need to have is a clear purpose. Why
are you doing that? Because it's going to cost you effort. So, if it's just to get something
in return, that will not work. You need to have something that really drives you to do this. And
once you are clear on what is your North Star, then you just have to take the first step and
then you will learn along the way and adjust and connect to people. So, I would say just start,
try something, iterate, and connect to people, follow people that do the same.
The good thing about social media is that there are already a lot of people doing that.
Probably a lot of people doing that in your field. Probably some people doing that in your field and
you really like the way they do it or the content they share. And so, they already laid out the
playbook for how to do it. So, sometimes it's just a matter of finding inspiration and find your own
way. And your brand is built really around sharing your knowledge of surgical robotics and tracking
trends and sharing information about that. So, what trends are you currently tracking in the industry?
Yeah, aside from robotics, right now, I'm quite interested in AI and augmented reality,
virtual reality. I think, you know, 10 years ago, the robot was the main technology we were talking
about. And now, we can see that it's not enough. There is instrumentation, there is technology, how
you prepare your surgery, how you train for using a surgical robot, how you use the data, where you
get the data, what insight you can get from the data that the robot is providing or the camera or
anything else that is used during the surgical procedure. So, I'm looking at all those, I would
So, I'm looking at all those, I would say, peripheral technologies to the robot,
and how they can actually and effectively be used in some kind of computer-assisted
surgical procedure. So, AI for, you know, surgical video management, surgical video analysis,
but also other topics. So, that's more for laparoscopy procedures, but also in like in
spine surgery, there can be very complex planning phase and AI can, you know, leverage all the data
from previous procedures to help you plan faster or plan better. So, that's all the AI components.
And I'm interested into how will be the interface to operate this device in the future.
And augmented reality is something that we see having a growing interest in a surgical procedure
to basically avoid, you know, the surgeon to turn the neck, look at one screen, turn the neck the
other side, look at the video or look at the instrument or his hands or the patient and
having this kind of wearables will probably help the ergonomics of the situation.
And then virtual reality, I think we've seen, I think yesterday, there was a new
FDA clearance from Avatar Medical, they get the FDA clearance for their pre-surgical planning
solution that leverage virtual reality and advanced 3D rendering to prepare the case.
So, virtual reality, there are a lot of use cases to train or to prepare the case or
interoperatively to get information. So, all those technologies, I keep an eye on and I'm
looking at how they, where are the use case, where they benefit the most.
Okay. So, what do you think the operating room of the future looks like then? So,
10 years down the line, what kind of technologies are we seeing and what is going to be in these ORs?
Yeah, you know, I'm quite humble in that sense that we can dream of a lot of technologies,
but I know it takes a lot of time to come to the OR, to get through approvals,
to get a clinical adoption, to get people to really acknowledge that there is a benefit of
those technologies. So, I don't think in 10 years time, that will evolve a lot. But basically, I
think we can, you know, there is a lot of data, there is a lot of devices that were not really
interoperable until today. So, I think the operating room in 10 years should be more integrated
in the way that the device talk together, share data, share the same user interface. And the data
that is produced during the case should also be more used, exploited, analyzed, and to provide
insights during the case or after the case to the surgeon while moving to something more integrated
and using more the data that is produced because there are a lot of data that is produced during
the case. So, that's overall what I'm looking at, more integrated suite and more insights.
So, what do you think are the biggest challenges that we're facing as an industry right now
in surgical robots?
Well, everybody's facing the kind of crisis that is right now in the medtech space. We've seen
the layoffs in the tech industry first, then in the medtech industry, and especially in
surgical robotics. And every geography is different. But in the US, you know, the hospitals, they
suffer from the COVID situation. They don't have that much money to invest on capital intensive
equipment. So, the business model is evolving towards a different model to enable those
hospitals to not acquire upfront the technology, but being able to use the technology and like
pay Berkeley or a subscription model or all that kind of different alternatives that enable to
use a technology without having to pay too much upfront. So, there is this economic situation
that is challenging for every company that is trying to sell a very innovative
technology, medical technology. And at the same time, it's an opportunity also for a small startup
that can go fast to, you know, to do better on a specific niche or specific market segment.
Because the big strategics, they sometimes go away from some markets and because they figure
out that this is not economically beneficial for them, but that leaves some space for smaller
companies, I guess.
Okay. So, what companies are you excited about? So, have you got anyone that you're
tracking on your radar that you think have got a really cool product or a great market opportunity?
Yeah, everyone is on my radar. But I'm very curious about what's happening in China,
not because of the innovation and the technology, because I think they are kind of
delivering the first generation of robots in surgery, but they do this at a speed that
we do not experience here in Europe and the US. And so, it's moving a lot. I mean,
Asia market is changing a lot and there is so many companies developing what we could call
the high-end premium products for their market specifically. And at some point, they could come
to Europe and to the US once they've established their position in their home country. So,
China, Asia is something I'm looking at. And then I'm quite curious about all the
very specific and different indications that are being developed. For instance, I'm looking at
ophthalmic surgery right now. So, two French medtech startups, AcuSurgical, Caranova, they're
working in this field. This is something that has not been called surgical robots for decades. And
that's kind of the first introduction of robotics in this packet. So, I'm quite a curious guy. So,
I'm looking at pretty much everything. Yeah, great. So, let's talk more about the
China market then. So, why do you think it's experienced such a rapid, rapid growth of robots
in China? Yeah, I'm not in China. So, I don't have that much information, but I think it was
basically a very strong political, strategical choice to develop their own in-house production
and design of surgical robots. So, that's a choice they've made. I think it was, yeah,
close to 10 years ago. So, it was in 2015, this Made in China for China plan, where the medical
technology and surgical robots were identified as one of the areas they should build and support
their local industry to have big players offering the same level of technology as what outside
companies, foreign companies were doing to avoid importing surgical robots. So,
there were very strong incentives. And I also think that the technology is more accessible
right now. Maybe 5, 10, 15 years ago, it was quite a challenge to assemble a team of engineers,
scientists, quality regulatory, all the skillset, because it's quite complex to do a surgical
robot. You need very different skillsets. And with time, all these competencies, all this
experience have been built in the world. And so, it's more accessible for these kind of companies
to attract talent, attract people, attract people with experience to build these kind of devices.
It's more a matter of money and regulatory clearances. And so, if you get some help
on this side from your government, that definitely is a great help.
Yeah. And you guys are looking to enter the China market. With all of that complexity and
difficulty to enter, why are you going after China as a core market?
You know, we are humble on this situation. We will see how the China market... Basically,
we've been away from the China market for quite some time due to the COVID situation.
So now, it just starts to open again. It's not the same situation as in 2010. And so,
we will look at how that will work, how we can bring this kind of technology to the China market.
And we will adapt because we don't know what it's going to be like in 2, 3, 5 years' time.
So, the goal is to see how that will unroll.
Cool. So, bringing it back to a regional conversation,
France is a bit of a hotbed for surgical robots. Outside the US and outside of China,
it's got a large number of surgical robotics startups and also a couple of mature organizations.
So, talk to me, why do you think France is that become kind of a leader in surgical robots?
Yeah, I think it's different reasons. One, I think we have kind of a relatively cheap,
very good engineers compared to the US. So, if you want to... I mean,
building a surgical robot is capital intensive and you need to get highly qualified engineers
to do the software, to do the hardware, to do the instrumentation and all these skillsets. So,
France is a country where we have very good engineers that have been trained on various
specialties. And so, you can find the people that have the skills to develop your product.
In France also, there is also a strong incentive from the government to do innovation. So,
there is what we call the Crédit d'impôt Recherche, that's basically the company gets
reimbursed a fraction of what they spend in R&D. So, it's a good situation for the company to,
when you're early stage and you develop an innovative product, you get a non-dilutive
funding this way. And also, I think there is a strong surgical medical community and history
around innovation. So, that's historically a country that has provided innovation in surgery.
And so, you have good research laboratory in robotics, you have engineers and you have surgeons
that are used to drive innovation. And when you can combine all these and have non-dilutive
funding to make your project move forward, that makes a great ecosystem to start a medical startup
in surgical robotics. The challenge then for France is that we do not have the same
one at the same size in terms of funding than the US. And so, bringing a company from
an early stage, early commercial company to a big player, that's where the challenge is for France.
Yeah, great stuff. And so, with that funding conversation continuing, how has Quantum
been funded so far and what's the plan to fund the business into the future?
Yeah. So far, we've raised a total of 50 million euros since the company was incorporated in 2017,
both in equity and non-dilutive funding. And we are looking at a new round, fundraising round
next year that will bring that to 100 million euros. So, in the startup world, you are always
looking for money. It's just a matter of when you will raise that money.
Yeah. So, how do you go about raising those sorts of money? How do you
go about searching for that and what activities are you doing to raise that kind of finance?
Well, for the first round, it's a bit specific because we created the company on our own money
for the first year and then we raised in 2018 with the ABG, Adebridge Group, one of the investors of
the last round of CMR Surgical. And this investor was already a part of the MedTech story. So,
the previous adventure before the company was acquired by Zimmer Biomed. So, that was something
we knew, who trusted the management team and who trusted the vision. So, the
first fundraising story was a bit different than a first-time entrepreneur or a classical
search for this kind of money. And now, we are back to a more traditional approach
to fundraising. And basically, it's meeting investors, doing calls,
going to conferences and getting some support from people who are specialised in this kind of
activity. It's a lot of presenting the presentation of the company, of the
latest achievements and building the equity story and the future of the company.
And how do you decide on an investor? So, you speak to a lot of people, I'm sure you have
multiple offers from different places. How do you decide who's going to be the right fit for the
company? I think one criteria is beyond the money, what will the investor bring to the company?
Because it's really, really difficult to build a surgical robotics company.
And so, you need to have as much help as you can from your investors, from your board.
And so, whenever you can find someone who has already a network in this industry, who can
have a vision on the strategy, who can help you on the Chinese market or on the US market or
on commercialisation or whatever. So, the better is to find an investor that will bring you
more than the money, it will bring you a strategical point of view, perspective,
it will bring you a network of people that you can reach for various reasons. And yeah,
I think that's what you are looking for when you try to select an investor.
So, when you're selecting people for your team, what kind of culture or what kind of person are
you looking for? What are the key behaviour traits? What kind of people do you look for?
And yeah, what kind of culture are you trying to build at Quantum?
I think what we're, it's not exactly the same when we started the company and right now,
but basically, adaptability, I think is key. We are in, we're still a startup. The future is
always uncertain. And so, we can, we need to have people that are ready to embrace change,
that are engaged into the vision, into the mission. And so, we need to have people that
are capable of doing more than just a job description, willing to help their teammates,
willing to do something that maybe it's not exactly what is in their title, and ready to
change, adapt, iterate, because we have to do that as a startup to adjust to any kind of situation.
And we've seen that with the COVID, we've seen that with the crisis right now, and permanently,
we have to adapt our strategy, we have to adapt our plans. And the mission and the vision is still
the same. And we deliver pretty much on plan. But we have to do a lot of adaptation on a daily basis.
So people need to be adaptable, and people need to be engaged. And people need to really to be
convinced about, they want to work in the, you know, for a medical device, because it's a,
you know, that it's a very regulated environment. So there is a lot of work to be done
outside just, you know, developing a technology, or selling a technology. And this has to be a
strong willingness to work for a medical device. Great. And so, more generally looking at the
sector, what advice would you give people who are looking to enter into surgical robotics,
whether that's from an academic background, another medtech company, or even from an
alternative industry? I mean, the first, we're not that big market, so I would say network,
because not all the opportunities are in a job offer. So I would, this is maybe one of the first
opportunities to get a job is to network with people. Then I would say, don't wait to be in
the industry to build your knowledge, to build your experience, some experience in surgical
robotics. You can try to attend cases, you can try, you can read papers, you can watch videos,
you can talk to surgeons, you can build yourself your own vision, your own knowledge of surgical
robotics, because nobody's trained for surgical robotics. There is no, you know, degree in surgical
robotics. So companies are expecting some kind of experience, and it's easier when you show that
you have a patient for this field, and you've done something, and you're capable of doing things on
your own autonomously, and that you've reached some level of understanding, either on the
clinical aspect, or on the market, or on the quality regulatory. Then it really depends which
kind of role you want to do. But if you want to enter into product development, you need to
know at least some of the standards, and some of the basic technologies.
And to close off this episode, what do you think are the three key ingredients that would make up
a successful surgical robotics company? Three ingredients for a successful
surgical robotics company? I would say, you know, it's a product market fit first, because
you can build the greatest technology if it doesn't fit a clinical need,
and a market size, you will never reach the success. So that's really
something that is important, and sometimes it requires the company to shift its
strategy when it finds that the product is not actually fitting the first market that
it was intended. And actually for Intuitive Surgical, they were aiming at cardiology first,
cardiac surgery first, and they ended up getting a huge success in radical prostatectomy. So
it's always good to have that in mind. I think I would say differentiation,
maybe I'm biased on this, but I think you need to show, right now you need to show
that you are providing something that is really differentiated from what is existing on a market,
or what is the conventional technique on the market. So really some element of differentiating,
it can be technology, but it can be also a business model, it can be something else.
And yeah, I think the third one is some kind of, I would say resilience,
be resilient, because it's a tough road, you will go through ups and downs,
and so you need to have a team, and management, and the leadership that is capable to go through
this quite difficult journey sometimes. Brilliant stuff. Thank you very much for
joining me today, Lucian, it's been a pleasure to chat to you. Thank you, Henry.
